
Immanuel Kant
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
"Kant" redirects here. For other uses, see Kant (disambiguation).
Immanuel Kant
Kant gemaelde 3.jpg
Born	22 April 1724
Königsberg, Prussia
Died	12 February 1804 (aged 79)
Königsberg, Prussia
Nationality	Prussian
Education	Collegium Fridericianum
University of Königsberg
(B.A.; M.A., April 1755; PhD, September 1755; PhD,[1] August 1770)
Era	Age of Enlightenment
Region	Western philosophy
School	
Kantianism
Enlightenment philosophy
German idealism[2]
Foundationalism[3]
Metaphysical conceptualism[4]
Perceptual non-conceptualism[5][6]
Transcendental idealism
Empirical realism
Correspondence theory of truth[7]
Liberal naturalism[8]
Kantian ethics
Classical liberalism
Institutions	University of Königsberg
Theses	
Principiorum primorum cognitionis metaphysicae nova dilucidatio (A New Elucidation of the First Principles of Metaphysical Cognition) (September 1755)
[Immanuel Kant, p. PA123, at Google Books De mundi sensibilis atque intelligibilis forma et principiis (Dissertation on the Form and Principles of the Sensible and the Intelligible World)] (August 1770)
Academic advisors	Martin Knutzen, Johann Gottfried Teske (M.A. advisor), Konrad Gottlieb Marquardt[9]
Notable students	Jakob Sigismund Beck, Johann Gottlieb Fichte
Main interests
EpistemologyMetaphysicsEthicsAestheticsCosmogony
Notable ideas
Abstract–concrete distinction[10]
Aesthetic–teleological judgments
Analytic–synthetic distinction
Categorical and hypothetical imperative
Categories
Cosmotheology
Critical philosophy
Empirical realism
Kant's antinomies
Kant's pitchfork
Kingdom of Ends
Mathematical and dynamical sublimity[11]
Nebular hypothesis
Noogony and noology
Noumenon/thing-in-itself
Ontotheology
Primacy of the practical[12]
Public reason
Rechtsstaat
Sapere aude
Transcendental schema
Transcendental idealism
Transcendental theology
Understanding–reason distinction
Influences[show]
Influenced[show]
Signature
Immanuel Kant signature.svg
Part of a series on
Immanuel Kant
Immanuel Kant
Major works
Critique of Pure Reason
Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics
Answering the Question: What is Enlightenment?
Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals
Critique of Practical Reason
Critique of Judgment
Religion within the Bounds of Bare Reason
Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch
The Metaphysics of Morals
KantianismKantian ethics
Transcendental idealism Critical philosophy Sapere aude Thing-in-itself Schema A priori and a posteriori Analytic–synthetic distinction Noumenon Categories Categorical imperative Hypothetical imperative "Kingdom of Ends" Political philosophy
People
George Berkeley René Descartes J. G. Fichte F. H. Jacobi G. W. F. Hegel David Hume Arthur Schopenhauer Baruch Spinoza African Spir Johannes Tetens
Related topics
Schopenhauer's criticism German idealism Neo-Kantianism
vte
Immanuel Kant (/kænt/;[15] German: [ʔɪˈmaːnu̯eːl ˈkant, -nu̯ɛl -];[16][17] 22 April 1724 – 12 February 1804) was an influential German philosopher.[18] In his doctrine of transcendental idealism, he argued that space, time and causation are mere sensibilities; "things-in-themselves" exist, but their nature is unknowable.[19][20] In his view, the mind shapes and structures experience, with all human experience sharing certain structural features. He drew a parallel to the Copernican revolution in his proposition that worldly objects can be intuited a priori ('beforehand'), and that intuition is therefore independent from objective reality.[21] Kant believed that reason is the source of morality, and that aesthetics arise from a faculty of disinterested judgment. Kant's views continue to have a major influence on contemporary philosophy, especially the fields of epistemology, ethics, political theory, and post-modern aesthetics.

In one of Kant's major works, the Critique of Pure Reason (1781),[22] he attempted to explain the relationship between reason and human experience and to move beyond the failures of traditional philosophy and metaphysics. Kant wanted to put an end to an era of futile and speculative theories of human experience, while resisting the skepticism of thinkers such as David Hume. Kant regarded himself as showing the way past the impasse between rationalists and empiricists which philosophy had led to,[23] and is widely held to have synthesized both traditions in his thought.[24]

Kant was an exponent of the idea that perpetual peace could be secured through universal democracy and international cooperation. He believed that this would be the eventual outcome of universal history, although it is not rationally planned.[25] The nature of Kant's religious ideas continues to be the subject of philosophical dispute, with viewpoints ranging from the impression that he was an initial advocate of atheism who at some point developed an ontological argument for God, to more critical treatments epitomized by Nietzsche, who claimed that Kant had "theologian blood"[26] and was merely a sophisticated apologist for traditional Christian faith.[a]

Kant published other important works on ethics, religion, law, aesthetics, astronomy, and history. These include the Universal Natural History (1755), the Critique of Practical Reason (1788), the Metaphysics of Morals (1797), and the Critique of Judgment (1790), which looks at aesthetics and teleology.


Contents
1	Biography
1.1	Young scholar
1.2	Early work
1.3	Work hiatus
1.4	Later work and death
2	Philosophy
2.1	Theory of perception
2.2	Categories of the Faculty of Understanding
2.3	Transcendental schema doctrine
2.4	Moral philosophy
2.4.1	First formulation
2.4.2	Second formulation
2.4.3	Third formulation
2.4.4	Religion Within the Limits of Reason
2.4.5	Idea of freedom
2.4.6	Categories of freedom
2.5	Aesthetic philosophy
2.6	Political philosophy
3	Anthropology
4	Influence
4.1	Historical influence
4.2	Influence on modern thinkers
5	Personal legacy
6	Tomb and statue
7	Bibliography
7.1	List of major works
7.2	Collected works in German
8	See also
9	Notes
10	References and footnotes
10.1	Works cited
11	Further reading
12	External links
Biography
Kant's mother, Anna Regina Reuter[28] (1697–1737), was born in Königsberg (since 1946 the city of Kaliningrad, Kaliningrad Oblast, Russia) to a father from Nuremberg. Her surname is sometimes erroneously given as Porter. Kant's father, Johann Georg Kant (1682–1746), was a German harness maker from Memel, at the time Prussia's most northeastern city (now Klaipėda, Lithuania). Kant believed that his paternal grandfather Hans Kant was of Scottish origin.[29] While scholars of Kant's life long accepted the claim, there is no evidence that Kant's paternal line was Scottish and it is more likely that the Kants got their name from the village of Kantwaggen (today part of Priekulė) and were of Curonian origin.[30][31] Kant was the fourth of nine children (four of whom reached adulthood).[32]

Kant was born on 22 April 1724 into a Prussian German family of Lutheran Protestant faith in Königsberg, East Prussia. Baptized Emanuel, he later changed his name to Immanuel[33] after learning Hebrew. He was brought up in a Pietist household that stressed religious devotion, humility, and a literal interpretation of the Bible.[citation needed] His education was strict, punitive and disciplinary, and focused on Latin and religious instruction over mathematics and science.[34] Kant maintained Christian ideals for some time, but struggled to reconcile the faith with his belief in science.[35] In his Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals, he reveals a belief in immortality as the necessary condition of humanity's approach to the highest morality possible.[36][37] However, as Kant was skeptical about some of the arguments used prior to him in defence of theism and maintained that human understanding is limited and can never attain knowledge about God or the soul, various commentators have labelled him a philosophical agnostic.[38][39][40][41][42][43]

Common myths about Kant's personal mannerisms are listed, explained, and refuted in Goldthwait's introduction to his translation of Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime.[44] It is often held that Kant lived a very strict and disciplined life, leading to an oft-repeated story that neighbors would set their clocks by his daily walks. He never married, but seemed to have a rewarding social life — he was a popular teacher and a modestly successful author even before starting on his major philosophical works. He had a circle of friends with whom he frequently met, among them Joseph Green, an English merchant in Königsberg.

A common myth is that Kant never traveled more than 16 kilometres (9.9 mi) from Königsberg his whole life.[45] In fact, between 1750 and 1754 he worked as a tutor (Hauslehrer) in Judtschen[46] (now Veselovka, Russia, approximately 20 km) and in Groß-Arnsdorf[47] (now Jarnołtowo near Morąg (German: Mohrungen), Poland, approximately 145 km).

Young scholar
Kant showed a great aptitude for study at an early age. He first attended the Collegium Fridericianum from which he graduated at the end of the summer of 1740. In 1740, aged 16, he enrolled at the University of Königsberg, where he spent his whole career.[48] He studied the philosophy of Gottfried Leibniz and Christian Wolff under Martin Knutzen (Associate Professor of Logic and Metaphysics from 1734 until his death in 1751), a rationalist who was also familiar with developments in British philosophy and science and introduced Kant to the new mathematical physics of Isaac Newton. Knutzen dissuaded Kant from the theory of pre-established harmony, which he regarded as "the pillow for the lazy mind".[49] He also dissuaded Kant from idealism, the idea that reality is purely mental, which most philosophers in the 18th century regarded in a negative light. The theory of transcendental idealism that Kant later included in the Critique of Pure Reason was developed partially in opposition to traditional idealism.

His father's stroke and subsequent death in 1746 interrupted his studies. Kant left Königsberg shortly after August 1748[50]—he would return there in August 1754.[51] He became a private tutor in the towns surrounding Königsberg, but continued his scholarly research. In 1749, he published his first philosophical work, Thoughts on the True Estimation of Living Forces (written in 1745–47).[52]

Early work
Kant is best known for his work in the philosophy of ethics and metaphysics,[53] but he made significant contributions to other disciplines. In 1754, while contemplating on a prize question by the Berlin Academy about the problem of Earth's rotation, he argued that the Moon's gravity would slow down Earth's spin and he also put forth the argument that gravity would eventually cause the Moon's tidal locking to coincide with the Earth's rotation.[b][55] The next year, he expanded this reasoning to the formation and evolution of the Solar System in his Universal Natural History and Theory of the Heavens.[55]


Kant's house in Königsberg
In the Universal Natural History, Kant laid out the Nebular hypothesis, in which he deduced that the Solar System had formed from a large cloud of gas, a nebula. Kant also correctly deduced (though through usually false premisses and fallacious reasoning, according to Bertrand Russell[56]) that the Milky Way was a large disk of stars, which he theorized formed from a much larger spinning gas cloud. He further suggested that other distant "nebulae" might be other galaxies. These postulations opened new horizons for astronomy, for the first time extending it beyond the Solar System to galactic and intergalactic realms.[57] According to Thomas Huxley (1867), Kant also made contributions to geology in his Universal Natural History.[citation needed]

From then on, Kant turned increasingly to philosophical issues, although he continued to write on the sciences throughout his life. In the early 1760s, Kant produced a series of important works in philosophy. The False Subtlety of the Four Syllogistic Figures, a work in logic, was published in 1762. Two more works appeared the following year: Attempt to Introduce the Concept of Negative Magnitudes into Philosophy and The Only Possible Argument in Support of a Demonstration of the Existence of God. In 1764, Kant wrote Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime and then was second to Moses Mendelssohn in a Berlin Academy prize competition with his Inquiry Concerning the Distinctness of the Principles of Natural Theology and Morality (often referred to as "The Prize Essay"). In 1766 Kant wrote Dreams of a Spirit-Seer which dealt with the writings of Emanuel Swedenborg. The exact influence of Swedenborg on Kant, as well as the extent of Kant's belief in mysticism according to Dreams of a Spirit-Seer, remain controversial.[14] On 31 March 1770, aged 45, Kant was finally appointed Full Professor of Logic and Metaphysics (Professor Ordinarius der Logic und Metaphysic) at the University of Königsberg. In defense of this appointment, Kant wrote his inaugural dissertation (Inaugural-Dissertation) De Mundi Sensibilis atque Intelligibilis Forma et Principiis (On the Form and Principles of the Sensible and the Intelligible World).[1] This work saw the emergence of several central themes of his mature work, including the distinction between the faculties of intellectual thought and sensible receptivity. To miss this distinction would mean to commit the error of subreption, and, as he says in the last chapter of the dissertation, only in avoiding this error does metaphysics flourish.

The issue that vexed Kant was central to what 20th-century scholars called "the philosophy of mind". The flowering of the natural sciences had led to an understanding of how data reaches the brain. Sunlight falling on an object is reflected from its surface in a way that maps the surface features (color, texture, etc.). The reflected light reaches the human eye, passes through the cornea, is focused by the lens onto the retina where it forms an image similar to that formed by light passing through a pinhole into a camera obscura. The retinal cells send impulses through the optic nerve and then they form a mapping in the brain of the visual features of the object. The interior mapping is not the exterior object, and our belief that there is a meaningful relationship between the object and the mapping in the brain depends on a chain of reasoning that is not fully grounded. But the uncertainty aroused by these considerations, by optical illusions, misperceptions, delusions, etc., are not the end of the problems.

Kant saw that the mind could not function as an empty container that simply receives data from outside. Something must be giving order to the incoming data. Images of external objects must be kept in the same sequence in which they were received. This ordering occurs through the mind's intuition of time. The same considerations apply to the mind's function of constituting space for ordering mappings of visual and tactile signals arriving via the already described chains of physical causation.

It is often claimed that Kant was a late developer, that he only became an important philosopher in his mid-50s after rejecting his earlier views. While it is true that Kant wrote his greatest works relatively late in life, there is a tendency to underestimate the value of his earlier works. Recent Kant scholarship has devoted more attention to these "pre-critical" writings and has recognized a degree of continuity with his mature work.[58]

Work hiatus
At age 46, Kant was an established scholar and an increasingly influential philosopher, and much was expected of him.

In correspondence with his ex-student and friend Markus Herz, Kant admitted that, in the inaugural dissertation, he had failed to account for the relation between our sensible and intellectual faculties. He needed to explain how we combine what is known as sensory knowledge with the other type of knowledge—i.e. reasoned knowledge—these two being related but having very different processes.

Kant also credited David Hume with awakening him from a "dogmatic slumber".[59] Hume had stated that experience consists only of sequences of feelings, images or sounds. Ideas such as "cause", goodness, or objects were not evident in experience, so why do we believe in the reality of these? Kant felt that reason could remove this skepticism, and he set himself to solving these problems. He did not publish any work in philosophy for the next 11 years.


Immanuel Kant
Although fond of company and conversation with others, Kant isolated himself, and resisted friends' attempts to bring him out of his isolation. It has been noted that in 1778, in response to one of these offers by a former pupil, Kant wrote:

Any change makes me apprehensive, even if it offers the greatest promise of improving my condition, and I am persuaded by this natural instinct of mine that I must take heed if I wish that the threads which the Fates spin so thin and weak in my case to be spun to any length. My great thanks, to my well-wishers and friends, who think so kindly of me as to undertake my welfare, but at the same time a most humble request to protect me in my current condition from any disturbance.[60]

When Kant emerged from his silence in 1781, the result was the Critique of Pure Reason. Although now uniformly recognized as one of the greatest works in the history of philosophy, this Critique was largely ignored upon its initial publication. The book was long, over 800 pages in the original German edition, and written in a convoluted style. It received few reviews, and these granted it no significance. Kant's former student, Johann Gottfried Herder criticized it for placing reason as an entity worthy of criticism instead of considering the process of reasoning within the context of language and one's entire personality.[61] Similar to Christian Garve and Johann Georg Heinrich Feder, he rejected Kant's position that space and time possessed a form that could be analyzed. Additionally, Garve and Feder also faulted Kant's Critique for not explaining differences in perception of sensations.[62] Its density made it, as Herder said in a letter to Johann Georg Hamann, a "tough nut to crack", obscured by "all this heavy gossamer".[63] Its reception stood in stark contrast to the praise Kant had received for earlier works, such as his Prize Essay and shorter works that preceded the first Critique. These well-received and readable tracts include one on the earthquake in Lisbon that was so popular that it was sold by the page.[64] Prior to the change in course documented in the first Critique, his books sold well, and by the time he published Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime in 1764 he had become a notable popular author.[65] Kant was disappointed with the first Critique's reception. Recognizing the need to clarify the original treatise, Kant wrote the Prolegomena to any Future Metaphysics in 1783 as a summary of its main views. Shortly thereafter, Kant's friend Johann Friedrich Schultz (1739–1805) (professor of mathematics) published Erläuterungen über des Herrn Professor Kant Critik der reinen Vernunft (Königsberg, 1784), which was a brief but very accurate commentary on Kant's Critique of Pure Reason.

Kant's reputation gradually rose through the latter portion of the 1780s, sparked by a series of important works: the 1784 essay, "Answer to the Question: What is Enlightenment?"; 1785's Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (his first work on moral philosophy); and, from 1786, Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science. But Kant's fame ultimately arrived from an unexpected source. In 1786, Karl Leonhard Reinhold published a series of public letters on Kantian philosophy. In these letters, Reinhold framed Kant's philosophy as a response to the central intellectual controversy of the era: the Pantheism Dispute. Friedrich Jacobi had accused the recently deceased Gotthold Ephraim Lessing (a distinguished dramatist and philosophical essayist) of Spinozism. Such a charge, tantamount to atheism, was vigorously denied by Lessing's friend Moses Mendelssohn, leading to a bitter public dispute among partisans. The controversy gradually escalated into a debate about the values of the Enlightenment and the value of reason.

Reinhold maintained in his letters that Kant's Critique of Pure Reason could settle this dispute by defending the authority and bounds of reason. Reinhold's letters were widely read and made Kant the most famous philosopher of his era.

Later work and death
Kant published a second edition of the Critique of Pure Reason (Kritik der reinen Vernunft) in 1787, heavily revising the first parts of the book. Most of his subsequent work focused on other areas of philosophy. He continued to develop his moral philosophy, notably in 1788's Critique of Practical Reason (known as the second Critique) and 1797's Metaphysics of Morals. The 1790 Critique of Judgment (the third Critique) applied the Kantian system to aesthetics and teleology. It was in this critique where Kant wrote one of his most popular statements, "it is absurd to hope that another Newton will arise in the future who will make comprehensible to us the production of a blade of grass according to natural laws".[66]

In 1792, Kant's attempt to publish the Second of the four Pieces of Religion within the Bounds of Bare Reason, in the journal Berlinische Monatsschrift, met with opposition from the King's censorship commission, which had been established that same year in the context of the French Revolution.[67] Kant then arranged to have all four pieces published as a book, routing it through the philosophy department at the University of Jena to avoid the need for theological censorship.[67] This insubordination earned him a now famous reprimand from the King.[67] When he nevertheless published a second edition in 1794, the censor was so irate that he arranged for a royal order that required Kant never to publish or even speak publicly about religion.[67] Kant then published his response to the King's reprimand and explained himself, in the preface of The Conflict of the Faculties.[67]


Kant with friends, including Christian Jakob Kraus, Johann Georg Hamann, Theodor Gottlieb von Hippel and Karl Gottfried Hagen
He also wrote a number of semi-popular essays on history, religion, politics and other topics. These works were well received by Kant's contemporaries and confirmed his preeminent status in 18th-century philosophy. There were several journals devoted solely to defending and criticizing Kantian philosophy. Despite his success, philosophical trends were moving in another direction. Many of Kant's most important disciples and followers (including Reinhold, Beck and Fichte) transformed the Kantian position into increasingly radical forms of idealism. The progressive stages of revision of Kant's teachings marked the emergence of German Idealism. Kant opposed these developments and publicly denounced Fichte in an open letter in 1799.[68] It was one of his final acts expounding a stance on philosophical questions. In 1800, a student of Kant named Gottlob Benjamin Jäsche (1762–1842) published a manual of logic for teachers called Logik, which he had prepared at Kant's request. Jäsche prepared the Logik using a copy of a textbook in logic by Georg Friedrich Meier entitled Auszug aus der Vernunftlehre, in which Kant had written copious notes and annotations. The Logik has been considered of fundamental importance to Kant's philosophy, and the understanding of it. The great 19th-century logician Charles Sanders Peirce remarked, in an incomplete review of Thomas Kingsmill Abbott's English translation of the introduction to Logik, that "Kant's whole philosophy turns upon his logic."[69] Also, Robert Schirokauer Hartman and Wolfgang Schwarz, wrote in the translators' introduction to their English translation of the Logik, "Its importance lies not only in its significance for the Critique of Pure Reason, the second part of which is a restatement of fundamental tenets of the Logic, but in its position within the whole of Kant's work."[70]

Kant's health, long poor, worsened and he died at Königsberg on 12 February 1804, uttering "Es ist gut (It is good)" before expiring.[71] His unfinished final work was published as Opus Postumum.

Kant wrote a book discussing his theory of virtue in terms of independence which he believed was "a viable modern alternative to more familiar Greek views about virtue". This book is often criticized for its hostile tone and for not articulating his thoughts about autocracy comprehensibly. In the self-governance model of Aristotelian virtue, the non-rational part of the soul can be made to listen to reason through training. Although Kantian self-governance appears to involve "a rational crackdown on appetites and emotions" with lack of harmony between reason and emotion, Kantian virtue denies requiring "self-conquest, self-suppression, or self-silencing". They dispute that "the self-mastery constitutive of virtue is ultimately mastery over our tendency of will to give priority to appetite or emotion unregulated by duty, it does not require extirpating, suppressing, or silencing sensibility in general".[72]

Philosophy
Main article: Kantianism

It has been suggested that this article be split into a new article titled Kantianism. (Discuss) (December 2018)

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
Find sources: "Immanuel Kant" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
In Kant's essay "Answering the Question: What is Enlightenment?", Kant defined the Enlightenment as an age shaped by the Latin motto Sapere aude ("Dare to be wise"). Kant maintained that one ought to think autonomously, free of the dictates of external authority. His work reconciled many of the differences between the rationalist and empiricist traditions of the 18th century. He had a decisive impact on the Romantic and German Idealist philosophies of the 19th century. His work has also been a starting point for many 20th century philosophers.

Kant asserted that, because of the limitations of argumentation in the absence of irrefutable evidence, no one could really know whether there is a God and an afterlife or not. For the sake of morality and as a ground for reason, Kant asserted, people are justified in believing in God, even though they could never know God's presence empirically. He explained:

All the preparations of reason, therefore, in what may be called pure philosophy, are in reality directed to those three problems only [God, the soul, and freedom]. However, these three elements in themselves still hold independent, proportional, objective weight individually. Moreover, in a collective relational context; namely, to know what ought to be done: if the will is free, if there is a God, and if there is a future world. As this concerns our actions with reference to the highest aims of life, we see that the ultimate intention of nature in her wise provision was really, in the constitution of our reason, directed to moral interests only.[73]


Immanuel Kant by Carle Vernet (1758–1836)
The sense of an enlightened approach and the critical method required that "If one cannot prove that a thing is, he may try to prove that it is not. If he fails to do either (as often occurs), he may still ask whether it is in his interest to accept one or the other of the alternatives hypothetically, from the theoretical or the practical point of view. Hence the question no longer is as to whether perpetual peace is a real thing or not a real thing, or as to whether we may not be deceiving ourselves when we adopt the former alternative, but we must act on the supposition of its being real."[74] The presupposition of God, soul, and freedom was then a practical concern, for "Morality, by itself, constitutes a system, but happiness does not, unless it is distributed in exact proportion to morality. This, however, is possible in an intelligible world only under a wise author and ruler. Reason compels us to admit such a ruler, together with life in such a world, which we must consider as future life, or else all moral laws are to be considered as idle dreams... ."[75]

Kant drew a parallel between the Copernican revolution and the epistemology of his new transcendental philosophy. He never used the "Copernican revolution" phrase about himself, but it has often been applied to his work by others.[76]

Kant's Copernican revolution involved two interconnected foundations of his "critical philosophy":

the epistemology of transcendental idealism and
the moral philosophy of the autonomy of practical reason.
These teachings placed the active, rational human subject at the center of the cognitive and moral worlds. Kant argued that the rational order of the world as known by science was not just the accidental accumulation of sense perceptions.

Conceptual unification and integration is carried out by the mind through concepts or the "categories of the understanding" operating on the perceptual manifold within space and time. The latter are not concepts,[77] but are forms of sensibility that are a priori necessary conditions for any possible experience. Thus the objective order of nature and the causal necessity that operates within it depend on the mind's processes, the product of the rule-based activity that Kant called, "synthesis." There is much discussion among Kant scholars about the correct interpretation of this train of thought.

The 'two-world' interpretation regards Kant's position as a statement of epistemological limitation, that we are not able to transcend the bounds of our own mind, meaning that we cannot access the "thing-in-itself". However, Kant also speaks of the thing in itself or transcendental object as a product of the (human) understanding as it attempts to conceive of objects in abstraction from the conditions of sensibility. Following this line of thought, some interpreters have argued that the thing in itself does not represent a separate ontological domain but simply a way of considering objects by means of the understanding alone – this is known as the two-aspect view.

The notion of the "thing in itself" was much discussed by philosophers after Kant. It was argued that because the "thing in itself" was unknowable, its existence must not be assumed. Rather than arbitrarily switching to an account that was ungrounded in anything supposed to be the "real," as did the German Idealists, another group arose to ask how our (presumably reliable) accounts of a coherent and rule-abiding universe were actually grounded. This new kind of philosophy became known as Phenomenology, and its founder was Edmund Husserl.

With regard to morality, Kant argued that the source of the good lies not in anything outside the human subject, either in nature or given by God, but rather is only the good will itself. A good will is one that acts from duty in accordance with the universal moral law that the autonomous human being freely gives itself. This law obliges one to treat humanity – understood as rational agency, and represented through oneself as well as others – as an end in itself rather than (merely) as means to other ends the individual might hold. This necessitates practical self-reflection in which we universalize our reasons.

These ideas have largely framed or influenced all subsequent philosophical discussion and analysis. The specifics of Kant's account generated immediate and lasting controversy. Nevertheless, his theses – that the mind itself necessarily makes a constitutive contribution to its knowledge, that this contribution is transcendental rather than psychological, that philosophy involves self-critical activity, that morality is rooted in human freedom, and that to act autonomously is to act according to rational moral principles – have all had a lasting effect on subsequent philosophy.

Theory of perception
Main article: Critique of Pure Reason
Kant defines his theory of perception in his influential 1781 work the Critique of Pure Reason, which has often been cited as the most significant volume of metaphysics and epistemology in modern philosophy.[citation needed] Kant maintains that our understanding of the external world had its foundations not merely in experience, but in both experience and a priori concepts, thus offering a non-empiricist critique of rationalist philosophy, which is what has been referred to as his Copernican revolution.[78]

Firstly, Kant distinguishes between analytic and synthetic propositions:

Analytic proposition: a proposition whose predicate concept is contained in its subject concept; e.g., "All bachelors are unmarried," or, "All bodies take up space."
Synthetic proposition: a proposition whose predicate concept is not contained in its subject concept; e.g., "All bachelors are alone," or, "All bodies have weight."
An analytic proposition is true by nature of the meaning of the words in the sentence — we require no further knowledge than a grasp of the language to understand this proposition. On the other hand, a synthetic statement is one that tells us something about the world. The truth or falsehood of synthetic statements derives from something outside their linguistic content. In this instance, weight is not a necessary predicate of the body; until we are told the heaviness of the body we do not know that it has weight. In this case, experience of the body is required before its heaviness becomes clear. Before Kant's first Critique, empiricists (cf. Hume) and rationalists (cf. Leibniz) assumed that all synthetic statements required experience to be known.

Kant contests this assumption by claiming that elementary mathematics, like arithmetic, is synthetic a priori, in that its statements provide new knowledge not derived from experience. This becomes part of his over-all argument for transcendental idealism. That is, he argues that the possibility of experience depends on certain necessary conditions — which he calls a priori forms — and that these conditions structure and hold true of the world of experience. His main claims in the "Transcendental Aesthetic" are that mathematic judgments are synthetic a priori and that space and time are not derived from experience but rather are its preconditions.

Once we have grasped the functions of basic arithmetic, we do not need empirical experience to know that 100 + 100 = 200, and so it appears that arithmetic is analytic. However, that it is analytic can be disproved by considering the calculation 5 + 7 = 12: there is nothing in the numbers 5 and 7 by which the number 12 can be inferred.[citation needed] Thus "5 + 7" and "the cube root of 1,728" or "12" are not analytic because their reference is the same but their sense is not — the statement "5 + 7 = 12" tells us something new about the world. It is self-evident, and undeniably a priori, but at the same time it is synthetic. Thus Kant argued that a proposition can be synthetic and a priori.

Kant asserts that experience is based on the perception of external objects and a priori knowledge.[79] The external world, he writes, provides those things that we sense. But our mind processes this information and gives it order, allowing us to comprehend it. Our mind supplies the conditions of space and time to experience objects. According to the "transcendental unity of apperception", the concepts of the mind (Understanding) and perceptions or intuitions that garner information from phenomena (Sensibility) are synthesized by comprehension. Without concepts, perceptions are nondescript; without perceptions, concepts are meaningless — thus the famous statement, "Thoughts without content are empty, intuitions (perceptions) without concepts are blind."[80]

Kant also claims that an external environment is necessary for the establishment of the self. Although Kant would want to argue that there is no empirical way of observing the self, we can see the logical necessity of the self when we observe that we can have different perceptions of the external environment over time. By uniting these general representations into one global representation, we can see how a transcendental self emerges. "I am therefore conscious of the identical self in regard to the manifold of the representations that are given to me in an intuition because I call them all together my representations."[81]

Categories of the Faculty of Understanding
See also: Category (Kant)

Kant statue in the School of Philosophy and Human Sciences (FAFICH) in the Federal University of Minas Gerais (UFMG), Belo Horizonte, Brazil
Kant deemed it obvious that we have some objective knowledge of the world, such as, say, Newtonian physics. But this knowledge relies on synthetic, a priori laws of nature, like causality and substance. How is this possible? Kant's solution was that the subject must supply laws that make experience of objects possible, and that these laws are synthetic, a priori laws of nature that apply to all objects before we experience them. To deduce all these laws, Kant examined experience in general, dissecting in it what is supplied by the mind from what is supplied by the given intuitions. This is commonly called a transcendental deduction.[82]

To begin with, Kant's distinction between the a posteriori being contingent and particular knowledge, and the a priori being universal and necessary knowledge, must be kept in mind. If we merely connect two intuitions together in a perceiving subject, the knowledge is always subjective because it is derived a posteriori, when what is desired is for the knowledge to be objective, that is, for the two intuitions to refer to the object and hold good of it for anyone at any time, not just the perceiving subject in its current condition. What else is equivalent to objective knowledge besides the a priori, (universal and necessary knowledge)? Before knowledge can be objective, it must be incorporated under an a priori category of understanding.[82][83]

For example, if a subject says, "The sun shines on the stone; the stone grows warm," all he perceives are phenomena. His judgment is contingent and holds no necessity. But if he says, "The sunshine causes the stone to warm," he subsumes the perception under the category of causality, which is not found in the perception, and necessarily synthesizes the concept sunshine with the concept heat, producing a necessarily universally true judgment.[82]

To explain the categories in more detail, they are the preconditions of the construction of objects in the mind. Indeed, to even think of the sun and stone presupposes the category of subsistence, that is, substance. For the categories synthesize the random data of the sensory manifold into intelligible objects. This means that the categories are also the most abstract things one can say of any object whatsoever, and hence one can have an a priori cognition of the totality of all objects of experience if one can list all of them. To do so, Kant formulates another transcendental deduction.[82]

Judgments are, for Kant, the preconditions of any thought. Man thinks via judgments, so all possible judgments must be listed and the perceptions connected within them put aside, so as to make it possible to examine the moments when the understanding is engaged in constructing judgments. For the categories are equivalent to these moments, in that they are concepts of intuitions in general, so far as they are determined by these moments universally and necessarily. Thus by listing all the moments, one can deduce from them all of the categories.[82]

One may now ask: How many possible judgments are there? Kant believed that all the possible propositions within Aristotle's syllogistic logic are equivalent to all possible judgments, and that all the logical operators within the propositions are equivalent to the moments of the understanding within judgments. Thus he listed Aristotle's system in four groups of three: quantity (universal, particular, singular), quality (affirmative, negative, infinite), relation (categorical, hypothetical, disjunctive) and modality (problematic, assertoric, apodeictic). The parallelism with Kant's categories is obvious: quantity (unity, plurality, totality), quality (reality, negation, limitation), relation (substance, cause, community) and modality (possibility, existence, necessity).[82]

The fundamental building blocks of experience, i.e. objective knowledge, are now in place. First there is the sensibility, which supplies the mind with intuitions, and then there is the understanding, which produces judgments of these intuitions and can subsume them under categories. These categories lift the intuitions up out of the subject's current state of consciousness and place them within consciousness in general, producing universally necessary knowledge. For the categories are innate in any rational being, so any intuition thought within a category in one mind is necessarily subsumed and understood identically in any mind. In other words, we filter what we see and hear.[82]

Transcendental schema doctrine
See also: Schema (Kant)
Kant ran into a problem with his theory that the mind plays a part in producing objective knowledge. Intuitions and categories are entirely disparate, so how can they interact? Kant's solution is the (transcendental) schema: a priori principles by which the transcendental imagination connects concepts with intuitions through time. All the principles are temporally bound, for if a concept is purely a priori, as the categories are, then they must apply for all times. Hence there are principles such as substance is that which endures through time, and the cause must always be prior to the effect.[82][84]

Moral philosophy

Immanuel Kant
Kant developed his moral philosophy in three works: Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals (1785), Critique of Practical Reason (1788), and Metaphysics of Morals (1797).

In Groundwork, Kant' tries to convert our everyday, obvious, rational[85] knowledge of morality into philosophical knowledge. The latter two works used "practical reason", which is based only on things about which reason can tell us, and not deriving any principles from experience, to reach conclusions which can be applied to the world of experience (in the second part of The Metaphysic of Morals).

Kant is known for his theory that there is a single moral obligation, which he called the "Categorical Imperative", and is derived from the concept of duty. Kant defines the demands of moral law as "categorical imperatives". Categorical imperatives are principles that are intrinsically valid; they are good in and of themselves; they must be obeyed in all situations and circumstances, if our behavior is to observe the moral law. The Categorical Imperative provides a test against which moral statements can be assessed. Kant also stated that the moral means and ends can be applied to the categorical imperative, that rational beings can pursue certain "ends" using the appropriate "means". Ends based on physical needs or wants create hypothetical imperatives. The categorical imperative can only be based on something that is an "end in itself", that is, an end that is not a means to some other need, desire, or purpose.[86] Kant believed that the moral law is a principle of reason itself, and is not based on contingent facts about the world, such as what would make us happy, but to act on the moral law which has no other motive than "worthiness of being happy".[87] Accordingly, he believed that moral obligation applies only to rational agents.[88]

Unlike a hypothetical imperative, a categorical imperative is an unconditional obligation; it has the force of an obligation regardless of our will or desires[89] In Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals (1785) Kant enumerated three formulations of the categorical imperative that he believed to be roughly equivalent.[90] In the same book, Kant stated:

Act only according to that maxim whereby you can, at the same time, will that it should become a universal law.[91]
According to Kant, one cannot make exceptions for oneself. The philosophical maxim on which one acts should always be considered to be a universal law without exception. One cannot allow oneself to do a particular action unless one thinks it appropriate that the reason for the action should become a universal law. For example, one should not steal, however dire the circumstances—because, by permitting oneself to steal, one makes stealing a universally acceptable act. This is the first formulation of the categorical imperative, often known as the universalizability principle.

Kant believed that, if an action is not done with the motive of duty, then it is without moral value. He thought that every action should have pure intention behind it; otherwise, it is meaningless. The final result is not the most important aspect of an action; rather, how the person feels while carrying out the action is the time when value is attached to the result.

In Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals, Kant also posited the "counter-utilitarian idea that there is a difference between preferences and values, and that considerations of individual rights temper calculations of aggregate utility", a concept that is an axiom in economics:[92]

Everything has either a price or a dignity. Whatever has a price can be replaced by something else as its equivalent; on the other hand, whatever is above all price, and therefore admits of no equivalent, has a dignity. But that which constitutes the condition under which alone something can be an end in itself does not have mere relative worth, i.e., price, but an intrinsic worth, i.e., a dignity. (p. 53, italics in original).

A phrase quoted by Kant, which is used to summarize the counter-utilitarian nature of his moral philosophy, is Fiat justitia, pereat mundus, ("Let justice be done, though the world perish"), which he translates loosely as "Let justice reign even if all the rascals in the world should perish from it". This appears in his 1795 Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch ("Zum ewigen Frieden. Ein philosophischer Entwurf"), Appendix 1.[93][94][95]

First formulation

In his Metaphysics, Immanuel Kant introduced the categorical imperative: "Act only according to that maxim whereby you can, at the same time, will that it should become a universal law."
The first formulation (Formula of Universal Law) of the moral imperative "requires that the maxims be chosen as though they should hold as universal laws of nature" .[90] This formulation in principle has as its supreme law the creed "Always act according to that maxim whose universality as a law you can at the same time will" and is the "only condition under which a will can never come into conflict with itself [....]"[96]

One interpretation of the first formulation is called the "universalizability test".[97] An agent's maxim, according to Kant, is his "subjective principle of human actions": that is, what the agent believes is his reason to act.[98] The universalisability test has five steps:

Find the agent's maxim (i.e., an action paired with its motivation). Take, for example, the declaration "I will lie for personal benefit". Lying is the action; the motivation is to fulfill some sort of desire. Together, they form the maxim.
Imagine a possible world in which everyone in a similar position to the real-world agent followed that maxim.
Decide if contradictions or irrationalities would arise in the possible world as a result of following the maxim.
If a contradiction or irrationality would arise, acting on that maxim is not allowed in the real world.
If there is no contradiction, then acting on that maxim is permissible, and is sometimes required.
(For a modern parallel, see John Rawls' hypothetical situation, the original position.)

Second formulation
The second formulation (or Formula of the End in Itself) holds that "the rational being, as by its nature an end and thus as an end in itself, must serve in every maxim as the condition restricting all merely relative and arbitrary ends".[90] The principle dictates that you "[a]ct with reference to every rational being (whether yourself or another) so that it is an end in itself in your maxim", meaning that the rational being is "the basis of all maxims of action" and "must be treated never as a mere means but as the supreme limiting condition in the use of all means, i.e., as an end at the same time".[99]

Third formulation
The third formulation (i.e. Formula of Autonomy) is a synthesis of the first two and is the basis for the "complete determination of all maxims". It states "that all maxims which stem from autonomous legislation ought to harmonize with a possible realm of ends as with a realm of nature".[90]

In principle, "So act as if your maxims should serve at the same time as the universal law (of all rational beings)", meaning that we should so act that we may think of ourselves as "a member in the universal realm of ends", legislating universal laws through our maxims (that is, a universal code of conduct), in a "possible realm of ends".[100] No one may elevate themselves above the universal law, therefore it is one's duty to follow the maxim(s).

Religion Within the Limits of Reason
Commentators, starting in the 20th century, have tended to see Kant as having a strained relationship with religion, though this was not the prevalent view in the 19th century. Karl Leonhard Reinhold, whose letters first made Kant famous, wrote "I believe that I may infer without reservation that the interest of religion, and of Christianity in particular, accords completely with the result of the Critique of Reason.".[101] Johann Schultz, who wrote one of the first Kant commentaries, wrote "And does not this system itself cohere most splendidly with the Christian religion? Do not the divinity and beneficence of the latter become all the more evident?"[102] This view continued throughout the 19th century, as noted by Friedrich Nietzsche, who said "Kant's success is merely a theologian's success."[103] The reason for these views was Kant's moral theology, and the widespread belief that his philosophy was the great antithesis to Spinozism, which had been convulsing the European academy for much of the 18th century. Spinozism was widely seen as the cause of the Pantheism controversy, and as a form of sophisticated pantheism or even atheism. As Kant's philosophy disregarded the possibility of arguing for God through pure reason alone, for the same reasons it also disregarded the possibility of arguing against God through pure reason alone. This, coupled with his moral philosophy (his argument that the existence of morality is a rational reason why God and an afterlife do and must exist), was the reason he was seen by many, at least through the end of the 19th century, as a great defender of religion in general and Christianity in particular.[citation needed]

Kant articulates his strongest criticisms of the organization and practices of religious organizations to those that encourage what he sees as a religion of counterfeit service to God.[104] Among the major targets of his criticism are external ritual, superstition and a hierarchical church order. He sees these as efforts to make oneself pleasing to God in ways other than conscientious adherence to the principle of moral rightness in choosing and acting upon one's maxims. Kant's criticisms on these matters, along with his rejection of certain theoretical proofs grounded in pure reason (particularly the ontological argument) for the existence of God and his philosophical commentary on some Christian doctrines, have resulted in interpretations that see Kant as hostile to religion in general and Christianity in particular (e.g., Walsh 1967). Nevertheless, other interpreters consider that Kant was trying to mark off defensible from indefensible Christian belief.[105] Kant sees in Jesus Christ the affirmation of a "pure moral disposition of the heart" that "can make man well-pleasing to God".[104] Regarding Kant's conception of religion, some critics have argued that he was sympathetic to deism.[106] Other critics have argued that Kant's moral conception moves from deism to theism (as moral theism), for example Allen W. Wood[107] and Merold Westphal.[108] As for Kant's book Religion within the Boundaries of bare Reason, it was emphasized that Kant reduced religiosity to rationality, religion to morality and Christianity to ethics.[109]

Idea of freedom
In the Critique of Pure Reason,[110] Kant distinguishes between the transcendental idea of freedom, which as a psychological concept is "mainly empirical" and refers to "the question whether we must admit a power of spontaneously beginning a series of successive things or states" as a real ground of necessity in regard to causality,[111] and the practical concept of freedom as the independence of our will from the "coercion" or "necessitation through sensuous impulses". Kant finds it a source of difficulty that the practical idea of freedom is founded on the transcendental idea of freedom,[112] but for the sake of practical interests uses the practical meaning, taking "no account of... its transcendental meaning," which he feels was properly "disposed of" in the Third Antinomy, and as an element in the question of the freedom of the will is for philosophy "a real stumbling-block" that has "embarrassed speculative reason".[111]

Kant calls practical "everything that is possible through freedom", and the pure practical laws that are never given through sensuous conditions but are held analogously with the universal law of causality are moral laws. Reason can give us only the "pragmatic laws of free action through the senses", but pure practical laws given by reason a priori[113] dictate "what ought to be done".[114][115]

Categories of freedom
In the Critique of Practical Reason, at the end of the second Main Part of the Analytics,[116] Kant introduces the categories of freedom, in analogy with the categories of understanding their practical counterparts. Kant's categories of freedom apparently function primarily as conditions for the possibility for actions (i) to be free, (ii) to be understood as free and (iii) to be morally evaluated. For Kant, although actions as theoretical objects are constituted by means of the theoretical categories, actions as practical objects (objects of practical use of reason, and which can be good or bad) are constituted by means of the categories of freedom. Only in this way can actions, as phenomena, be a consequence of freedom, and be understood and evaluated as such.[117]

Aesthetic philosophy
Kant discusses the subjective nature of aesthetic qualities and experiences in Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime (1764). Kant's contribution to aesthetic theory is developed in the Critique of Judgment (1790) where he investigates the possibility and logical status of "judgments of taste." In the "Critique of Aesthetic Judgment," the first major division of the Critique of Judgment, Kant used the term "aesthetic" in a manner that, according to Kant scholar W.H. Walsh, differs from its modern sense.[118] In the Critique of Pure Reason, to note essential differences between judgments of taste, moral judgments, and scientific judgments, Kant abandoned the term "aesthetic" as "designating the critique of taste," noting that judgments of taste could never be "directed" by "laws a priori."[119] After A. G. Baumgarten, who wrote Aesthetica (1750–58),[120] Kant was one of the first philosophers to develop and integrate aesthetic theory into a unified and comprehensive philosophical system, utilizing ideas that played an integral role throughout his philosophy.[121]

In the chapter "Analytic of the Beautiful" in the Critique of Judgment, Kant states that beauty is not a property of an artwork or natural phenomenon, but is instead consciousness of the pleasure that attends the 'free play' of the imagination and the understanding. Even though it appears that we are using reason to decide what is beautiful, the judgment is not a cognitive judgment,[122] "and is consequently not logical, but aesthetical" (§ 1). A pure judgement of taste is subjective since it refers to the emotional response of the subject and is based upon nothing but esteem for an object itself: it is a disinterested pleasure, and we feel that pure judgements of taste (i.e. judgements of beauty), lay claim to universal validity (§§ 20–22). It is important to note that this universal validity is not derived from a determinate concept of beauty but from common sense (§40). Kant also believed that a judgement of taste shares characteristics engaged in a moral judgement: both are disinterested, and we hold them to be universal. In the chapter "Analytic of the Sublime" Kant identifies the sublime as an aesthetic quality that, like beauty, is subjective, but unlike beauty refers to an indeterminate relationship between the faculties of the imagination and of reason, and shares the character of moral judgments in the use of reason. The feeling of the sublime, divided into two distinct modes (the mathematical and the dynamical sublime), describes two subjective moments that concern the relationship of the faculty of the imagination to reason. Some commentators[123] argue that Kant's critical philosophy contains a third kind of the sublime, the moral sublime, which is the aesthetic response to the moral law or a representation, and a development of the "noble" sublime in Kant's theory of 1764. The mathematical sublime results from the failure of the imagination to comprehend natural objects that appear boundless and formless, or appear "absolutely great" (§§ 23–25). This imaginative failure is then recuperated through the pleasure taken in reason's assertion of the concept of infinity. In this move the faculty of reason proves itself superior to our fallible sensible self (§§ 25–26). In the dynamical sublime there is the sense of annihilation of the sensible self as the imagination tries to comprehend a vast might. This power of nature threatens us but through the resistance of reason to such sensible annihilation, the subject feels a pleasure and a sense of the human moral vocation. This appreciation of moral feeling through exposure to the sublime helps to develop moral character.

Kant developed a distinction between an object of art as a material value subject to the conventions of society and the transcendental condition of the judgment of taste as a "refined" value in the propositions of his Idea of A Universal History (1784). In the Fourth and Fifth Theses of that work he identified all art as the "fruits of unsociableness" due to men's "antagonism in society"[124] and, in the Seventh Thesis, asserted that while such material property is indicative of a civilized state, only the ideal of morality and the universalization of refined value through the improvement of the mind "belongs to culture".[125]

Political philosophy
Main article: Political philosophy of Immanuel Kant
Part of a series on
Liberalism
Yellow flag waving.svg
Schools[show]
Ideas[show]
Variants[show]
People[show]
Organizations[show]
Regional variants[show]
Related topics[show]
Yellow flag waving.svg Liberalism portal
A coloured voting box.svg Politics portal
vte
In Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch,[126] Kant listed several conditions that he thought necessary for ending wars and creating a lasting peace. They included a world of constitutional republics.[127] His classical republican theory was extended in the Science of Right, the first part of the Metaphysics of Morals (1797).[128] Kant believed that universal history leads to the ultimate world of republican states at peace, but his theory was not pragmatic. The process was described in "Perpetual Peace" as natural rather than rational:

The guarantee of perpetual peace is nothing less than that great artist, nature...In her mechanical course we see that her aim is to produce a harmony among men, against their will, and indeed through their discord. As a necessity working according to laws we do not know, we call it destiny. But, considering its designs in universal history, we call it "providence," inasmuch as we discern in it the profound wisdom of a higher cause which predetermines the course of nature and directs it to the objective final end of the human race.[129]

Kant's political thought can be summarized as republican government and international organization. "In more characteristically Kantian terms, it is doctrine of the state based upon the law (Rechtsstaat) and of eternal peace. Indeed, in each of these formulations, both terms express the same idea: that of legal constitution or of 'peace through law'. Kant's political philosophy, being essentially a legal doctrine, rejects by definition the opposition between moral education and the play of passions as alternate foundations for social life. The state is defined as the union of men under law. The state is constituted by laws which are necessary a priori because they flow from the very concept of law. "A regime can be judged by no other criteria nor be assigned any other functions, than those proper to the lawful order as such." [130]

He opposed "democracy," which at his time meant direct democracy, believing that majority rule posed a threat to individual liberty. He stated, "...democracy is, properly speaking, necessarily a despotism, because it establishes an executive power in which 'all' decide for or even against one who does not agree; that is, 'all,' who are not quite all, decide, and this is a contradiction of the general will with itself and with freedom."[131] As with most writers at the time, he distinguished three forms of government i.e. democracy, aristocracy, and monarchy with mixed government as the most ideal form of it.

Anthropology

5 DM 1974 D silver coin commemorating the 250th birthday of Immanuel Kant in Königsberg
Kant lectured on anthropology for over 25 years. His Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View was published in 1798. (This was the subject of Michel Foucault's secondary dissertation for his State doctorate, Introduction to Kant's Anthropology.) Kant's Lectures on Anthropology were published for the first time in 1997 in German.[132] Introduction to Kant's Anthropology was translated into English and published by the Cambridge Texts in the History of Philosophy series in 2006.[133]

Kant was among the first people of his time to introduce anthropology as an intellectual area of study long before the field gained popularity. As a result, his texts are considered to have advanced the field. Kant's point of view also influenced the works of philosophers after him such as Martin Heidegger, Paul Ricoeur, and Jean Greisch.

Kant viewed anthropology in two broad categories. One category was the physiological approach which he referred to as "what nature makes of the human being". The other category was the pragmatic approach which explored the things a human "can and should make of himself".[134]

Influence
Kant's influence on Western thought has been profound.[135] Over and above his influence on specific thinkers, Kant changed the framework within which philosophical inquiry has been carried out. He accomplished a paradigm shift; very little philosophy is now carried out in the style of pre-Kantian philosophy. This shift consists in several closely related innovations that have become foundational in philosophy itself and in the social sciences and humanities generally:

Kant's "Copernican revolution", that placed the role of the human subject or knower at the center of inquiry into our knowledge, such that it is impossible to philosophize about things as they are independently of us or of how they are for us;[136]
His invention of critical philosophy, that is of the notion of being able to discover and systematically explore possible inherent limits to our ability to know through philosophical reasoning;
The notion of the "categorical imperative," an assertion that people are naturally endowed with the ability and obligation toward right reason and acting;
His creation of the concept of "conditions of possibility", as in his notion of "the conditions of possible experience" – that is that things, knowledge, and forms of consciousness rest on prior conditions that make them possible, so that, to understand or to know them, we must first understand these conditions;
The theory that objective experience is actively constituted or constructed by the functioning of the human mind;
His notion of moral autonomy as central to humanity;
His assertion of the principle that human beings should be treated as ends rather than as means.
Kant's ideas have been incorporated into a variety of schools of thought. These include German Idealism, Marxism, positivism, phenomenology, existentialism, critical theory, linguistic philosophy, structuralism, post-structuralism, and deconstructionism.[citation needed]

Historical influence

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
Find sources: "Immanuel Kant" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (July 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
During his own life, there was much critical attention paid to his thought. He had an influence on Reinhold, Fichte, Schelling, Hegel, and Novalis during the 1780s and 1790s. The school of thinking known as German Idealism developed from his writings. The German Idealists Fichte and Schelling, for example, tried to bring traditional "metaphysically" laden notions like "the Absolute", "God", and "Being" into the scope of Kant's critical thought.[137] In so doing, the German Idealists tried to reverse Kant's view that we cannot know what we cannot observe.


Statue of Immanuel Kant in Kaliningrad (Königsberg), Russia. Replica by Harald Haacke [de] of the original by Christian Daniel Rauch lost in 1945.
Hegel was one of Kant's first major critics. In response to what he saw as Kant's abstract and formal account, Hegel brought about an ethic focused on the "ethical life" of the community.[138] But Hegel's notion of "ethical life" is meant to subsume, rather than replace, Kantian ethics. And Hegel can be seen as trying to defend Kant's idea of freedom as going beyond finite "desires", by means of reason. Thus, in contrast to later critics like Nietzsche or Russell, Hegel shares some of Kant's most basic concerns.[139]

Kant's thinking on religion was used in Britain to challenge the decline in religious faith in the nineteenth century. British Catholic writers, notably G.K. Chesterton and Hilaire Belloc, followed this approach. Ronald Englefield debated this movement, and Kant's use of language.[c] Criticisms of Kant were common in the realist views of the new positivism at that time.

Arthur Schopenhauer was strongly influenced by Kant's transcendental idealism. He, like G.E. Schulze, Jacobi, and Fichte before him, was critical of Kant's theory of the thing in itself. Things in themselves, they argued, are neither the cause of what we observe nor are they completely beyond our access. Ever since the first Critique of Pure Reason philosophers have been critical of Kant's theory of the thing in itself. Many have argued, if such a thing exists beyond experience then one cannot posit that it affects us causally, since that would entail stretching the category 'causality' beyond the realm of experience.[d] For Schopenhauer things in themselves do not exist outside the non-rational will. The world, as Schopenhauer would have it, is the striving and largely unconscious will. Michael Kelly, in the preface to his 1910 book Kant's Ethics and Schopenhauer's Criticism, stated: "Of Kant it may be said that what is good and true in his philosophy would have been buried with him, were it not for Schopenhauer...."

With the success and wide influence of Hegel's writings, Kant's influence began to wane, though there was in Germany a movement that hailed a return to Kant in the 1860s, beginning with the publication of Kant und die Epigonen in 1865 by Otto Liebmann. His motto was "Back to Kant", and a re-examination of his ideas began (see Neo-Kantianism). During the turn of the 20th century there was an important revival of Kant's theoretical philosophy, known as the Marburg School, represented in the work of Hermann Cohen, Paul Natorp, Ernst Cassirer,[140] and anti-Neo-Kantian Nicolai Hartmann.[141]

Kant's notion of "Critique" has been quite influential. The Early German Romantics, especially Friedrich Schlegel in his "Athenaeum Fragments", used Kant's self-reflexive conception of criticism in their Romantic theory of poetry.[142] Also in Aesthetics, Clement Greenberg, in his classic essay "Modernist Painting", uses Kantian criticism, what Greenberg refers to as "immanent criticism", to justify the aims of Abstract painting, a movement Greenberg saw as aware of the key limitiaton—flatness—that makes up the medium of painting.[143] French philosopher Michel Foucault was also greatly influenced by Kant's notion of "Critique" and wrote several pieces on Kant for a re-thinking of the Enlightenment as a form of "critical thought". He went so far as to classify his own philosophy as a "critical history of modernity, rooted in Kant".[144]

Kant believed that mathematical truths were forms of synthetic a priori knowledge, which means they are necessary and universal, yet known through intuition.[145] Kant's often brief remarks about mathematics influenced the mathematical school known as intuitionism, a movement in philosophy of mathematics opposed to Hilbert's formalism, and Frege and Bertrand Russell's logicism.[146]

Influence on modern thinkers

West German postage stamp, 1974, commemorating the 250th anniversary of Kant's birth
With his Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch, Kant is considered to have foreshadowed many of the ideas that have come to form the democratic peace theory, one of the main controversies in political science.[147]

Prominent recent Kantians include the British philosophers P.F. Strawson,[148] Onora O'Neill,[149] and Quassim Cassam[150] and the American philosophers Wilfrid Sellars[151] and Christine Korsgaard.[152] Due to the influence of Strawson and Sellars, among others, there has been a renewed interest in Kant's view of the mind. Central to many debates in philosophy of psychology and cognitive science is Kant's conception of the unity of consciousness.[153]

Jürgen Habermas and John Rawls are two significant political and moral philosophers whose work is strongly influenced by Kant's moral philosophy.[154] They argued against relativism,[155] supporting the Kantian view that universality is essential to any viable moral philosophy. Jean-Francois Lyotard, however, emphasized the indeterminacy in the nature of thought and language and has engaged in debates with Habermas based on the effects this indeterminacy has on philosophical and political debates.[156]

Kant's influence also has extended to the social, behavioral, and physical sciences, as in the sociology of Max Weber, the psychology of Jean Piaget, and the linguistics of Noam Chomsky. Kant's work on mathematics and synthetic a priori knowledge is also cited by theoretical physicist Albert Einstein as an early influence on his intellectual development.[157] Because of the thoroughness of the Kantian paradigm shift, his influence extends to thinkers who neither specifically refer to his work nor use his terminology.

Personal legacy
Kant always cut a curious figure in his lifetime for his modest, rigorously scheduled habits, which have been referred to as clocklike. However, Heinrich Heine noted the magnitude of "his destructive, world-crushing thoughts" and considered him a sort of philosophical "executioner", comparing him to Robespierre with the observation that both men "represented in the highest the type of provincial bourgeois. Nature had destined them to weigh coffee and sugar, but Fate determined that they should weigh other things and placed on the scales of the one a king, on the scales of the other a god."[158]

When his body was transferred to a new burial spot, his skull was measured during the exhumation and found to be larger than the average German male's with a "high and broad" forehead.[159] His forehead has been an object of interest ever since it became well-known through his portraits: "In Döbler's portrait and in Kiefer's faithful if expressionistic reproduction of it — as well as in many of the other late eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century portraits of Kant — the forehead is remarkably large and decidedly retreating. Was Kant's forehead shaped this way in these images because he was a philosopher, or, to follow the implications of Lavater's system, was he a philosopher because of the intellectual acuity manifested by his forehead? Kant and Johann Kaspar Lavater were correspondents on theological matters, and Lavater refers to Kant in his work "Physiognomic Fragments, for the Education of Human Knowledge and Love of People" (Leipzig & Winterthur, 1775–1778).[160]

Tomb and statue

Kant's tomb in Kaliningrad, Russia
Kant's mausoleum adjoins the northeast corner of Königsberg Cathedral in Kaliningrad, Russia. The mausoleum was constructed by the architect Friedrich Lahrs and was finished in 1924 in time for the bicentenary of Kant's birth. Originally, Kant was buried inside the cathedral, but in 1880 his remains were moved to a neo-Gothic chapel adjoining the northeast corner of the cathedral. Over the years, the chapel became dilapidated and was demolished to make way for the mausoleum, which was built on the same location.

The tomb and its mausoleum are among the few artifacts of German times preserved by the Soviets after they conquered and annexed the city.[161] Today, many newlyweds bring flowers to the mausoleum.

Artifacts previously owned by Kant, known as Kantiana, were included in the Königsberg City Museum. However, the museum was destroyed during World War II.

A replica of the statue of Kant that stood in German times in front of the main University of Königsberg building was donated by a German entity in the early 1990s and placed in the same grounds.

After the expulsion of Königsberg's German population at the end of World War II, the University of Königsberg where Kant taught was replaced by the Russian-language Kaliningrad State University, which appropriated the campus and surviving buildings. In 2005, the university was renamed Immanuel Kant State University of Russia. The name change was announced at a ceremony attended by President Vladimir Putin of Russia and Chancellor Gerhard Schröder of Germany, and the university formed a Kant Society, dedicated to the study of Kantianism.

In the late November 2018, his tomb and statue were vandalized with paint by unknown assailants, who also scattered leaflets glorifying Rus' and denouncing Kant as a "traitor". The incident is apparently connected with a recent vote to rename Khrabrovo Airport, where Kant was in the lead for a while, prompting nationalist resentment.[162]

Bibliography
List of major works
(1749) Thoughts on the True Estimation of Living Forces (Gedanken von der wahren Schätzung der lebendigen Kräfte)
(March 1755) Universal Natural History and Theory of the Heavens (Allgemeine Naturgeschichte und Theorie des Himmels)
(April 1755) Brief Outline of Certain Meditations on Fire (Meditationum quarundam de igne succinta delineatio (master's thesis under Johann Gottfried Teske))[163][164][165][166]
(September 1755) A New Elucidation of the First Principles of Metaphysical Cognition (Principiorum primorum cognitionis metaphysicae nova dilucidatio (doctoral thesis))[167][168]
(1756) The Use in Natural Philosophy of Metaphysics Combined with Geometry, Part I: Physical Monadology (Metaphysicae cum geometrica iunctae usus in philosophin naturali, cuius specimen I. continet monadologiam physicam, abbreviated as Monadologia Physica (thesis as a prerequisite of associate professorship))[169]
(1762) The False Subtlety of the Four Syllogistic Figures (Die falsche Spitzfindigkeit der vier syllogistischen Figuren)
(1763) The Only Possible Argument in Support of a Demonstration of the Existence of God (Der einzig mögliche Beweisgrund zu einer Demonstration des Daseins Gottes)
(1763) Attempt to Introduce the Concept of Negative Magnitudes into Philosophy (Versuch den Begriff der negativen Größen in die Weltweisheit einzuführen)
(1764) Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime (Beobachtungen über das Gefühl des Schönen und Erhabenen)
(1764) Essay on the Illness of the Head (Über die Krankheit des Kopfes)
(1764) Inquiry Concerning the Distinctness of the Principles of Natural Theology and Morality (the Prize Essay) (Untersuchungen über die Deutlichkeit der Grundsätze der natürlichen Theologie und der Moral)
(1766) Dreams of a Spirit-Seer (Träume eines Geistersehers)[170]
(1768) On the Ultimate Ground of the Differentiation of Regions in Space (Von dem ersten Grunde des Unterschiedes der Gegenden im Raume)[171]
(August 1770) Dissertation on the Form and Principles of the Sensible and the Intelligible World (De mundi sensibilis atque intelligibilis forma et principiis (doctoral thesis))[172][173][174][1]
(1775) On the Different Races of Man (Über die verschiedenen Rassen der Menschen)
(1781) First edition of the Critique of Pure Reason[175] (Kritik der reinen Vernunft)[176]
(1783) Prolegomena to any Future Metaphysics (Prolegomena zu einer jeden künftigen Metaphysik)
(1784) "An Answer to the Question: What Is Enlightenment?" ("Beantwortung der Frage: Was ist Aufklärung?")[177]
(1784) "Idea for a Universal History with a Cosmopolitan Purpose" ("Idee zu einer allgemeinen Geschichte in weltbürgerlicher Absicht")
(1785) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten)
(1786) Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science (Metaphysische Anfangsgründe der Naturwissenschaft)
(1786) "What does it mean to orient oneself in thinking?" ("Was heißt: sich im Denken orientieren?")
(1786) Conjectural Beginning of Human History (Mutmaßlicher Anfang der Menschengeschichte)
(1787) Second edition of the Critique of Pure Reason[178] (Kritik der reinen Vernunft)[179]
(1788) Critique of Practical Reason (Kritik der praktischen Vernunft)[180]
(1790) Critique of Judgment (Kritik der Urteilskraft)[181]
(1793) Religion within the Limits of Reason Alone (Die Religion innerhalb der Grenzen der bloßen Vernunft)[182]
(1793) On the Old Saw: That May be Right in Theory But It Won't Work in Practice (Über den Gemeinspruch: Das mag in der Theorie richtig sein, taugt aber nicht für die Praxis)
(1795) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch[183] ("Zum ewigen Frieden")[184]
(1797) Metaphysics of Morals (Metaphysik der Sitten). First part is The Doctrine of Right, which has often been published separately as The Science of Right.
(1798) Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View (Anthropologie in pragmatischer Hinsicht)
(1798) The Contest of Faculties[185] (Der Streit der Fakultäten)[186]
(1800) Logic (Logik)
(1803) On Pedagogy (Über Pädagogik)[187]
(1804) Opus Postumum
(1817) Lectures on Philosophical Theology (Immanuel Kants Vorlesungen über die philosophische Religionslehre edited by K.H.L. Pölitz) [The English edition of A.W. Wood & G.M. Clark (Cornell, 1978) is based on Pölitz' second edition, 1830, of these lectures.][188]
Collected works in German
Wilhelm Dilthey inaugurated the Academy edition (the Akademie-Ausgabe abbreviated as AA or Ak) of Kant's writings (Gesammelte Schriften, Königlich-Preußische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Berlin, 1902–38) in 1895,[189] and served as its first editor. The volumes are grouped into four sections:

I. Kant's published writings (vols. 1–9),
II. Kant's correspondence (vols. 10–13),
III. Kant's literary remains, or Nachlass (vols. 14–23), and
IV. Student notes from Kant's lectures (vols. 24–29).
See also
	Philosophy portal
	Immanuel Kant portal
Aenesidemus
Agnosticism
Arthur Schopenhauer's criticism of Immanuel Kant's schemata
Kant Russian State University
List of liberal theorists
On the Basis of Morality
On Vision and Colors
Political philosophy of Immanuel Kant
Schopenhauer's criticism of the Kantian philosophy
Notes
 Nietzsche wrote that "Kant wanted to prove, in a way that would dumbfound the common man, that the common man was right: that was the secret joke of this soul."[27]
 Kant himself seems to have found his contribution not significant enough that he published his arguments in a newspaper commentary on the prize question and did not submit them to the Academy. The prize was instead awarded in 1756 to P. Frisi, who incorrectly argued against the slowing down of the spin.[54]
 See Englefield's article, Kant as Defender of the Faith in Nineteenth-century England", Question, 12, 16–27, (Pemberton, London) reprinted in Critique of Pure Verbiage, Essays on Abuses of Language in Literary, Religious, and Philosophical Writings, edited by G.A. Wells and D.R. Oppenheimer, Open Court, 1990.
 For a review of this problem and the relevant literature see The Thing in Itself and the Problem of Affection in the revised edition of Henry Allison's Kant's Transcendental Idealism.
References and footnotes
 Since he had written his last habilitation thesis 14 years earlier, a new habilitation thesis was required (see S.J. McGrath, Joseph Carew (eds.), Rethinking German Idealism, Palgrave Macmillan, 2016, p. 24).
 Frederick C. Beiser, German Idealism: The Struggle Against Subjectivism, 1781-1801, Harvard University Press, 2002, part I.
 Tom Rockmore, On Foundationalism: A Strategy for Metaphysical Realism, Rowman & Littlefield, 2004, p. 65.
 Oberst, Michael. 2015. "Kant on Universals." History of Philosophy Quarterly 32(4):335–52.
 Robert Hanna, "Kantian non-conceptualism", Philosophical Studies 137(1):41–64 (2008).
 The application of the term "perceptual non-conceptualism" to Kant's philosophy of perception is debatable (see "The Togetherness Principle, Kant’s Conceptualism, and Kant’s Non-Conceptualism" (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)).
 The Correspondence Theory of Truth (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)
 Hanna, Robert, Kant, Science, and Human Nature. Clarendon Press, 2006, p. 16.
 Biographies: Königsberg Professors – Manchester University: "His lectures on logic and metaphysics were quite popular, and he still taught theology, philosophy, and mathematics when Kant studied at the university. The only textbook found in Kant's library that stems from his student years was Marquardt's book on astronomy."
 KrV A51/B75–6. See also: Edward Willatt, Kant, Deleuze and Architectonics, Continuum, 2010 p. 17: "Kant argues that cognition can only come about as a result of the union of the abstract work of the understanding and the concrete input of sensation."
 "Immanuel Kant: Aesthetics – Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy". www.iep.utm.edu.
 KpV 101–02 (=Ak V, 121–22). See also: Paul Saurette, The Kantian Imperative: Humiliation, Common Sense, Politics, University of Toronto Press, 2005, p. 255 n. 32.
 Kuehn 2001, p. 251.
 Josephson-Storm, Jason (2017). The Myth of Disenchantment: Magic, Modernity, and the Birth of the Human Sciences. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp. 185–86. ISBN 978-0-226-40336-6.
 "Kant". Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
 "Duden | Immanuel | Rechtschreibung, Bedeutung, Definition". Duden (in German). Retrieved 20 October 2018.
 "Duden | Kant | Rechtschreibung, Bedeutung, Definition". Duden (in German). Retrieved 20 October 2018.
 McCormick, Matt. "Immanuel Kant: Metaphysics". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved 20 February 2019.
 Durant, Will; Durant, Ariel (1967). The Story of Civilization: Rousseau and Revolution. MJF Books. pp. 571, 574. ISBN 978-1-56731-021-4.
 Nigel Warburton (2011). "Chapter 19: Rose-tinted reality: Immanuel Kant". A little history of philosophy. Yale University Press. p. 134. ISBN 978-0-300-15208-1.
 "We here propose to do just what Copernicus did in attempting to explain the celestial movements. When he found that he could make no progress by assuming that all the heavenly bodies revolved round the spectator, he reversed the process, and tried the experiment of assuming that the spectator revolved.... We may make the same experiment with regard to the intuition of objects. If the intuition must conform to the nature of the objects, I do not see how we can know anything of them a priori. If, on the other hand, the object conforms to the nature of our faculty of intuition, I can then easily conceive the possibility of such an a priori knowledge." Kant, Immanuel. Translated by J.M.D. Meiklejohn, Critique of Pure Reason.
 Kant, Immanuel; Kitcher, Patricia (intro.); Pluhar, W. (trans.) (1996). Critique of Pure Reason. Indianapolis: Hackett. xxviii.
 Vanzo, Alberto (January 2013). "Kant on Empiricism and Rationalism". History of Philosophy Quarterly. 30 (1): 53–74.
 "Immanuel Kant". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 20 May 2010. Retrieved 6 October 2015.
 Idea for a Universal History with a Cosmopolitan Purpose.
 Friedrich Nietzsche, The Anti-Christ (1895), para. 10.
 Friedrich Nietzsche (trans. Walter Arnold Kaufmann), The Portable Nietzsche, 1976, p. 96.
 "Cosmopolis". Koenigsberg-is-dead.de. 23 April 2001. Retrieved 24 July 2009.
 Mortensen, Hans and Gertrud, Kants väterliche Ahnen und ihre Umwelt, Rede von 1952 in Jahrbuch der Albertus-Universität zu Königsberg, Pr., Holzner-Verlag, Kitzingen, Main 1953, Vol. 3, p. 26.
 R.K. Murray, "The Origin of Immanuel Kant's Family Name", Kantian Review 13(1), March 2008, pp. 190-93.
 Rosa Kohlheim, Volker Kohlheim, Duden – Familiennamen: Herkunft und Bedeutung von 20.000 Nachnamen, Bibliographisches Institut & F.A. Brockhaus AG, Mannheim 2005, p. 365.
 freunde-kants.com Archived 25 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine
 Kuehn 2001, p. 26.
 Kuehn 2001, p. 47.
 "Immanuel Kant: Philosophy of Religion – Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy". www.iep.utm.edu.
 Metaphysics, p. 131
 "Immanuel Kant". Christian Research Institute.
 "While this sounds skeptical, Kant is only agnostic about our knowledge of metaphysical objects such as God. And, as noted above, Kant's agnosticism leads to the conclusion that we can neither affirm nor deny claims made by traditional metaphysics." Andrew Fiala, J.M.D. Meiklejohn, Critique of Pure Reason – Introduction, p. xi.
 Edward J. Verstraete (2008). "The Popular Encyclopedia of Apologetics". In Ed Hindson; Ergun Caner. The Popular Encyclopedia of Apologetics: Surveying the Evidence for the Truth of Christianity. Harvest House Publishers. p. 82. ISBN 978-0-7369-2084-1. It is in this sense that modern atheism rests heavily upon the skepticism of David Hume and the agnosticism of Immanuel Kant.
 Norman L. Geisler; Frank Turek (2004). "Kant's Agnosticism: Should We Be Agnostic About It?". I Don't Have Enough Faith to Be an Atheist. Crossway. pp. 59–60. ISBN 978-1-58134-561-2. Immanuel Kant's impact has been even more devastating to the Christian worldview than David Hume's. For if Kant's philosophy is right, then there is no way to know anything about the real world, even empirically verifiable things!
 Gary D. Badcock (1997). Light of Truth and Fire of Love: A Theology of the Holy Spirit. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 113. ISBN 978-0-8028-4288-6. Kant has no interest in prayer or worship, and is in fact agnostic when it comes to such classical theological questions as the doctrine of God or of the Holy Spirit.
 Norman L. Geisler, Paul K. Hoffman, ed. (2006). "The Agnosticism of Immanuel Kant". Why I Am a Christian: Leading Thinkers Explain Why They Believe. Baker Books. p. 45. ISBN 978-0-8010-6712-9.
 Frank K. Flinn (2007). Encyclopedia of Catholicism. Infobase Publishing. p. 10. ISBN 978-0-8160-7565-2. Following Locke, the classic agnostic claims not to accept more propositions than are warranted by empirical evidence. In this sense an agnostic appeals to Immanuel Kant (1724–1804), who claims in his Critique of Pure Reason that since God, freedom, immortality, and the soul can be both proved and disproved by theoretical reason, we ought to suspend judgement about them.
 Kant, Immanuel. Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime. Trans. John T. Goldthwait. University of California Press, 1961, 2003. ISBN 0-520-24078-2
 Lewis, Rick. 2005. 'Kant 200 Years On'. Philosophy Now. No. 49.
 Vorländer, Karl. "Immanuel Kant: Bei Pfarrer Andersch in Judtschen".
 Vorländer, Karl. "Immanuel Kant: Bei Major von Hülsen in Arnsdorf".
 The American International Encyclopedia (New York: J.J. Little & Ives, 1954), Vol. IX.
 Porter, Burton (2010). What the Tortoise Taught Us: The Story of Philosophy. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 133.
 Kuehn 2001, p. 94.
 Kuehn 2001, p. 98.
 Eric Watkins (ed.), Immanuel Kant: Natural Science, Cambridge University Press, 2012: "Thoughts on the true estimation...". Stefano Veneroni (ed.), Pensieri sulla vera valutazione delle forze vive e critica delle dimostrazioni delle quali il Signor Leibniz ed altri studiosi di Meccanica si sono avvalsi in questa controversia, insieme ad alcune considerazioni preliminari riguardanti la forza dei corpi in generale, Milano-Udine, Mimesis Edizioni, 2019, 4 vol., 1567 p.
 "Immanuel Kant: Metaphysics – Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy". www.iep.utm.edu. Retrieved 6 February 2015.
 Schönfeld, Martin. The Philosophy of the Young Kant: The Precritical Project. Oxford University Press. p. 84. ISBN 0-19-513218-1.
 Brush, Stephen G. (2014). A History of Modern Planetary Physics: Nebulous Earth. p. 7. ISBN 978-0-521-44171-1.
 Bertrand Russell, Review of Kant's Cosmogony, Mind, n.s. 10, no. 39 (Jul 1901), 405-7.
 Gamow, George (1947). One Two Three... Infinity. New York: Viking P. pp. 300ff.
 Cf., for example, Susan Shell, The Embodiment of Reason (Chicago, 1996)
 Immanuel Kant, Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics, p. 57 (Ak. 4:260)
 Christopher Kul-Want and Andrzej Klimowski, Introducing Kant (Cambridge: Icon Books, 2005).[page needed] ISBN 1-84046-664-2
 Copleston, Frederick Charles. The Enlightenment: Voltaire to Kant. 2003. p. 146.
 Sassen, Brigitte. Kant's Early Critics: The Empiricist Critique of the Theoretical Philosophy. 2000.
 Ein Jahrhundert deutscher Literaturkritik, vol. III, Der Aufstieg zur Klassik in der Kritik der Zeit (Berlin, 1959), p. 315; as quoted in Gulyga, Arsenij. Immanuel Kant: His Life and Thought. Trans., Marijan Despaltović. Boston: Birkhäuser, 1987.
 Gulyga, Arsenij. Immanuel Kant: His Life and Thought. Trans., Marijan Despaltović. Boston: Birkhäuser, 1987 pp. 28–29.
 Gulyga, Arsenij. Immanuel Kant: His Life and Thought. Trans., Marijan Despaltović. Boston: Birkhäuser, 1987, p. 62.
 Wolfram, Stephen (2002). A New Kind of Science. Wolfram Media, Inc. p. 861. ISBN 978-1-57955-008-0.
 Derrida Vacant Chair p. 44.
 "Open letter by Kant denouncing Fichte's Philosophy (in German)". Korpora.org. Retrieved 24 July 2009.
 Peirce, C.S., Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, v. 1, (HUP, 1960), 'Kant and his Refutation of Idealism' p. 15
 Kant, Immanuel, Logic, G.B. Jäsche (ed), R.S. Hartman, W. Schwarz (translators), Indianapolis, 1984, p. xv.
 Karl Vorländer, Immanuel Kant: Der Mann und das Werk, Hamburg: Meiner, 1992, p. II 332.
 McAleer, Sean. "Kant's Theory of Virtue: The Value of Autocracy. Ethics". Heythrop Journal.
 Critique of Pure Reason, A801.
 The Science of Right, Conclusion.
 Critique of Pure Reason, A811.
 Tom Rockmore, Marx After Marxism: The Philosophy of Karl Marx (2002), p. 184.
 In the first edition of the Critique of Pure Reason Kant refers to space as "no discursive or...general conception of the relation of things, but a pure intuition" and maintained that "We can only represent to ourselves one space". The "general notion of spaces...depends solely upon limitations" (Meikeljohn trans., A25). In the second edition of the CPR, Kant adds, "The original representation of space is an a priori intuition, not a concept" (Kemp Smith trans., B40). In regard to time, Kant states that "Time is not a discursive, or what is called a general concept, but a pure form of sensible intuition. Different times are but parts of one and the same time; and the representation which can be given only through a single object is intuition" (A31/B47). For the differences in the discursive use of reason according to concepts and its intuitive use through the construction of concepts, see Critique of Pure Reason (A719/B747 ff. and A837/B865). On "One and the same thing in space and time" and the mathematical construction of concepts, see A724/B752.
 "Kant, Immanuel definition of Kant, Immanuel in the Free Online Encyclopedia". Encyclopedia2.thefreedictionary.com. Retrieved 26 February 2014.
 The German word Anschauung, which Kant used, literally means 'looking at' and generally means what in philosophy in English is called "perception". However it sometimes is rendered as "intuition": not, however, with the vernacular meaning of an indescribable or mystical experience or sixth sense, but rather with the meaning of the direct perception or grasping of sensory phenomena. In this article, both terms, "perception" and "intuition" are used to stand for Kant's Anschauung.
 Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason [1781], trans. Norman Kemp Smith (N.Y.: St. Martins, 1965), A 51/B 75.
 Kant, Immanuel. Critique of Pure Reason. Ed. Paul Guyer and Allen W. Wood. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1998. p. 248.
 Immanuel Kant, Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics, pp. 35–43.
 Deleuze on Kant Archived 14 November 2007 at the Wayback Machine, from where the definitions of a priori and a posteriori were obtained.
 Immanuel Kant, Critique of Judgment, the Introduction to the Hackett edition.
 The distinction between rational and philosophical knowledge is given in the Preface to the Groundwork, 1785.
 Kant, Foundations, p. 421.
 Critique of Pure Reason, A806/B834.
 Kant, Foundations, p. 408.
 Kant, Foundations, pp. 420–21.
 Kant, Foundations, p. 436.
 Kant, Immanuel (1993) [1785]. Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals. Translated by Ellington, James W. (3rd ed.). Hackett. p. 30. ISBN 978-0-87220-166-8.. It is standard to also reference the Akademie Ausgabe of Kant's works. The Groundwork occurs in the fourth volume.The above citation is taken from 4:421.
 Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (2003) Ecosystems and Well-being: A Framework for Assessment. Washington DC: Island Press, p. 142.
 "Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch: Appendix 1". Constitution.org. Retrieved 24 July 2009.
 Kant, Immanuel (1796). Project for a Perpetual Peace, p. 61. Retrieved 24 July 2009.
 Kant, Immanuel (1838). Immanuel Kant's Werke, revidirte Gesammtausg, p. 456. Retrieved 24 July 2009.
 Kant, Foundations, p. 437.
 "Kant and the German Enlightenment" in "History of Ethics". Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Vol. 3, pp. 95–96. MacMillan, 1973.
 Kant, Foundations, pp. 400, 429.
 Kant, Foundations, pp. 437–38.
 Kant, Foundations, pp. 438–39. See also Kingdom of Ends
 Karl Leonhard Reinhold, Letters on the Kantian Philosophy (1786), 3rd Letter
 Johann Schultz, Exposition of Kant's Critique of Pure Reason (1784), 141.
 "The Protestant pastor is the grandfather of German philosophy...German philosophy is at bottom – a cunning theology...Why the rejoicing heard through the German academic world – three-quarters composed of the sons of pastors and teachers-at the appearance of Kant? Why the Germans' conviction, which still find echo even today, that with Kant things were taking a turn of the better? Kant's success is merely a theologian's success". Nietzsche, The Antichrist, 10
 Immanuel Kant. Religion within the Limits of Reason Alone (1793), Book IV, Part 1, Section 1, "The Christian religion as a natural religion."
 "Kant's Philosophy of Religion (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)". Plato.stanford.edu. Retrieved 24 July 2009.
 For example Peter Byrne, who wrote about Kant's relationship with deism. Byrne, Peter (2007), Kant on God, London: Ashgate, p. 159.
 Wood, Allen W. (1970), Kant's moral religion, London and Ithaca: Cornell University Press, p. 16.
 Westphal, Merold (2010),The Emerge of Modern Philosophy of Religion, in Taliaferro, Charles, Draper, Paul and Quinn, Philip (editors), A Companion to Philosophy of Religion, Oxford: Blackwell, p. 135.
 Iţu, Mircia (2004), Dumnezeu şi religia în concepţia lui Immanuel Kant din Religia în limitele raţiunii, in Boboc, Alexandru and Mariş, N.I. (editors), Studii de istoria filosofiei universale, volume 12, Bucharest: Romanian Academy.
 The Norman Kemp Smith translation has been used for this section, with citation noting the pagination of the first and second editions.
 Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, A448/B476.
 Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, A534/B562.
 the same distinction of transcendental and practical meaning can be applied to the idea of God, with the proviso that the practical concept of freedom can be experienced (Critique of Pure Reason, A801-804/B829-832).
 Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, A800–2/B828–30.
 The concept of freedom is also handled in the third section of the Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals. In the Critique of Practical Reason see § VII and § VIII.
 5:65–67
 Susanne Bobzien, 'Die Kategorien der Freiheit bei Kant', in Kant: Analysen, Probleme, Kritik Vol. 1, 1988, 193–220.
 Critique of Judgment in "Kant, Immanuel" Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Vol 4. Macmillan, 1973.
 Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, A22/B36.
 Beardsley, Monroe. "History of Aesthetics". Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Vol. 1, section on "Toward a unified aesthetics", p. 25, Macmillan 1973. Baumgarten coined the term "aesthetics" and expanded, clarified, and unified Wolffian aesthetic theory, but had left the Aesthetica unfinished (See also: Tonelli, Giorgio. "Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten". Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Vol. 1, Macmillan 1973). In Bernard's translation of the Critique of Judgment he indicates in the notes that Kant's reference in § 15 in regard to the identification of perfection and beauty is probably a reference to Baumgarten.
 German Idealism in "History of Aesthetics" Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Vol 1. Macmillan, 1973.
 Kant's general discussions of the distinction between "cognition" and "conscious of" are also given in the Critique of Pure Reason (notably A320/B376), and section V and the conclusion of section VIII of his Introduction in Logic.
 Clewis, Robert (2009). "The Kantian Sublime and the Revelation of Freedom". Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 Kant, Immanuel. Idea for a Universal History. Trans. Lewis White Beck (20, 22).
 Kant, Immanuel. Idea for a Universal History. Trans. Lewis White Beck (26).
 Kant, Immanuel. Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1795)
 Kant, Immanuel. Perpetual Peace. Trans. Lewis White Beck (377).
 Manfred Riedel Between Tradition and Revolution: The Hegelian Transformation of Political Philosophy, Cambridge 1984
 On History, (ed. L.W. Beck, New York: Bobbs Merill, 1963, p. 106).
 History of Political Philosophy, edited by Leo Strauss and Joseph Cropsey, The University of Chicago Press, 1987, pp. 581–82, 603
 Kant, Immanuel. Perpetual Peace. Trans. Lewis White Beck (352).
 Thomas Sturm, Kant und die Wissenschaften vom Menschen (Paderborn: Mentis Verlag, 2009).
 Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View, ed. Robert B. Louden, introduction by Manfred Kuehn, Cambridge University Press, 2006
 Gregor, Brian. "Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View. By Immanuel Kant. Translated and edited by Robert B. Louden". Heythrop.
 Prof. Oliver A. Johnson claims that, "With the possible exception of Plato's Republic, (Critique of Pure Reason) is the most important philosophical book ever written." Article on Kant within the collection "Great thinkers of the Western World", Ian P. McGreal, Ed., HarperCollins, 1992.
 See Stephen Palmquist, "The Architectonic Form of Kant's Copernican Logic", Metaphilosophy 17:4 (October 1986), pp. 266–88; revised and reprinted as Chapter III of Kant's System of Perspectives: An architectonic interpretation of the Critical philosophy (Lanham: University Press of America, 1993).
 There is much debate in the recent scholarship about the extent to which Fichte and Schelling actually overstep the boundaries of Kant's critical philosophy, thus entering the realm of dogmatic or pre-Critical philosophy. Beiser's German Idealism discusses some of these issues. Beiser, Frederick C. German Idealism: The Struggle against Subjectivism, 1781–1801. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2002.
 Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Natural Law: The Scientific Ways of Treating Natural Law, Its Place in Moral Philosophy, and Its Relation to the Positive Sciences. trans. T.M. Knox. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1975. Hegel's mature view and his concept of "ethical life" is elaborated in his Philosophy of Right. Hegel, Philosophy of Right. trans. T.M. Knox. Oxford University Press, 1967.
 Robert Pippin's Hegel's Idealism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989) emphasizes the continuity of Hegel's concerns with Kant's. Robert Wallace, Hegel's Philosophy of Reality, Freedom, and God (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005) explains how Hegel's Science of Logic defends Kant's idea of freedom as going beyond finite "inclinations", contra skeptics such as David Hume.
 Beck, Lewis White. "Neo-Kantianism". In Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Vol. 5–6. Macmillan, 1973. Article on Neo-Kantianism by a translator and scholar of Kant.
 Cerf, Walter. "Nicolai Hartmann". In Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Vol. 3–4. Macmillan, 1973. Nicolai was a realist who later rejected the idealism of Neo-Kantianism, his anti-Neo-Kantian views emerging with the publication of the second volume of Hegel (1929).
 Schlegel, Friedrich. "Athenaeum Fragments", in Philosophical Fragments. Trans. Peter Firchow. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1991. See especially fragments Nos. 1, 43, 44.
 Greenberg, Clement. "Modernist Painting", in The Philosophy of Art, ed. Alex Neill and Aaron Ridley, McGraw-Hill, 1995.
 See "Essential Works of Foucault: 1954–1984 vol. 2: Aesthetics, Method, and Epistemology." Ed. by James Faubion, Trans. Robert Hurley et al. New York City: The New Press, 1998 (2010 reprint). See "Foucault, Michel, 1926 –" entry by Maurice Florence.
 For a discussion and qualified defense of this position, see Stephen Palmquist, "A Priori Knowledge in Perspective: (I) Mathematics, Method and Pure Intuition", The Review of Metaphysics 41:1 (September 1987), pp. 3–22.
 Körner, Stephan, The Philosophy of Mathematics, Dover, 1986. For an analysis of Kant's writings on mathematics see, Friedman, Michael, Kant and the Exact Sciences, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1992.
 Ray, James Lee. "Does Democracy Cause Peace?" Archived 17 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine Annual Review of Political Science 1998. 1:27–46.
 Strawson, P.F., The Bounds of Sense: An Essay on Kant's Critique of Pure Reason. Routledge: 2004. When first published in 1966, this book forced many Anglo-American philosophers to reconsider Kant's Critique of Pure Reason.
 Aridi, Sara (March 14, 2017). "Onora O'Neill Wins Holberg Prize for Academic Research". The New York Times.
 Cassam, Q., "The Possibility of Knowledge" Oxford: 2009
 Sellars, Wilfrid, Science and Metaphysics: Variations on Kantian Themes. Ridgeview Publishing Company, 1967
 Korsgaard, Christine. Creating the Kingdom of Ends. Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996. ISBN 0-521-49644-6, 0-521-49962-3 Not a commentary, but a defense of a broadly Kantian approach to ethics
 Brook, Andrew. Kant and the Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994. See also, Meerbote, R. "Kant's Functionalism". In: J.C. Smith, ed. Historical Foundations of Cognitive Science. Dordrecht, Holland: Reidel, 1991. Brook has an article on Kant's View of the Mind in the Stanford Encyclopedia
 See Habermas, J. Moral Consciousness and Communicative Action. Trans. Christian Lenhardt and Shierry Weber Nicholsen. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1996. For Rawls see, Rawls, John. Theory of Justice Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1971. Rawls has a well-known essay on Kant's concept of good. See, Rawls, "Themes in Kant's Moral Philosophy" in Kant's Transcendental Deductions. Ed. Eckart Förster. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1989.
 Habermas, J. (1994): The Unity of Reason in the Diversity of Its Voices. In: Habermas, J. (Eds.): Postmetaphysical Thinking. Political Essays, Cambridge, Massachusetts: 115–48.
 Rorty, R. (2984) Habermas and Lyotard on postmodernity. Praxis International (32–44)
 Issacson, Walter. "Einstein: His Life and Universe." p. 20.
 "Heine on Immanuel Kant" (PDF). Retrieved 10 July 2015.
 Examined Lives, From Socrates to Nietzsche, James Miller p. 284
 Immanuel Kant and the Bo(a)rders of Art History Mark Cheetham, in The Subjects of Art History: Historical Objects in Contemporary Perspectives, p. 16
 Beyer, Susanne (2014-07-25). "Resurrecting Königsberg: Russian City Looks to German Roots". Spiegel Online. Retrieved 2018-02-03.
 Kishkovsky, Sophia (28 November 2018). "Kant monument splashed with pink paint in Kaliningrad". The Art Newspaper. Retrieved 3 December 2018.
 The thesis was submitted on 17 April 1755. "The public examination was held four weeks later on 13 May, and the degree was formally awarded on 12 June" (Eric Watkins, Kant: Natural Science, Cambridge University Press, 2012, p. 309).
 Eric Watkins (ed.), Kant and the Sciences, Oxford University Press, 2001, p. 27.
 Martin Schonfeld, The Philosophy of the Young Kant: The Precritical Project, Oxford University Press, 2000, p. 74.
 Available online at Bonner Kant-Korpus.
 The thesis was publicly disputed on 27 September 1755 (Kuehn 2001, p. 100).
 Available online at Bonner Kant-Korpus.
 Kant's application for the position was unsuccessful. He defended it on 10 April 1756 (Kuehn 2001, p. 102).
 Available online at Archive.org.
 Immanuel Kant, "Concerning the ultimate ground of the differentiation of directions in space".
 The thesis was publicly disputed on 21 August 1770 (Kuehn 2001, p. 189).
 Available online at Google Books.
 English translation available online at Wikisource.
 Immanuel Kant. "The Critique of Pure Reason". Etext.library.adelaide.edu.au. Archived from the original on 2 December 2008. Retrieved 24 July 2009.
 Immanuel Kant (20 July 2009). "Projekt Gutenberg-DE – Spiegel Online – Nachrichten – Kultur". Gutenberg.spiegel.de. Retrieved 24 July 2009.
 Frank-Christian Lilienweihs (10 June 1999). "Immanuel Kant: Beantwortung der Frage: Was ist Aufklaerung?". Prometheusonline.de. Retrieved 24 July 2009.
 "Critique of Pure Reason". Hkbu.edu.hk. 31 October 2003. Retrieved 24 July 2009.
 "Projekt Gutenberg-DE – Spiegel Online – Nachrichten – Kultur". Gutenberg.spiegel.de. 20 July 2009. Retrieved 24 July 2009.
 Immanuel Kant (20 July 2009). "Projekt Gutenberg-DE – Spiegel Online – Nachrichten – Kultur". Gutenberg.spiegel.de. Retrieved 24 July 2009.
 s:The Critique of Judgment
 Immanuel Kant. "Religion within the Limits of Reason Alone by Immanuel Kant 1793". Marxists.org. Retrieved 24 July 2009.
 "Immanuel Kant, "Perpetual Peace"". Mtholyoke.edu. Retrieved 24 July 2009.
 "Immanuel Kant: Zum ewigen Frieden, 12.02.2004 (Friedensratschlag)". Uni-kassel.de. Retrieved 24 July 2009.
 "Kant, The Contest of Faculties". Chnm.gmu.edu. Retrieved 24 July 2009.
 Immanuel Kant (20 July 2009). "Projekt Gutenberg-DE – Spiegel Online – Nachrichten – Kultur". Gutenberg.spiegel.de. Retrieved 24 July 2009.
 Available online at DeutschesTextArchiv.de.
 As noted by Allen W. Wood in his Introduction, p. 12. Wood further speculates that the lectures themselves were delivered in the Winter of 1783–84.
 Immanuel Kant, Notes and Fragments, Cambridge University Press, 2005, p. xvi.
Works cited
Kant, Immanuel. Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals. Trans. Lewis White Beck, Indianapolis, Bobbs-Merrill, 1969. Page numbers citing this work are Beck's marginal numbers that refer to the page numbers of the standard edition of Königlich-Preußische Akademie der Wissenschaften (Berlin, 1902–38).
Kuehn, Manfred. Kant: a Biography. Cambridge University Press, 2001. ISBN 0-521-49704-3.
Further reading

This article's further reading may not follow Wikipedia's content policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing less relevant or redundant publications with the same point of view; or by incorporating the relevant publications into the body of the article through appropriate citations. (February 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
In Germany, one important contemporary interpreter of Kant and the movement of German Idealism he began is Dieter Henrich, who has some work available in English. P.F. Strawson's The Bounds of Sense (1966) played a significant role in determining the contemporary reception of Kant in England and America. More recent interpreters of note in the English-speaking world include Lewis White Beck, Jonathan Bennett, Henry Allison, Paul Guyer, Christine Korsgaard, Stephen Palmquist, Robert B. Pippin, Roger Scruton, Rudolf Makkreel, and Béatrice Longuenesse.

General introductions to his thought

Broad, C.D. Kant: An Introduction. Cambridge University Press, 1978. ISBN 0-521-21755-5, 0-521-29265-4
Gardner, Sebastian. Kant and the Critique of Pure Reason. Routledge, 1999. ISBN 0-415-11909-X
Martin, Gottfried. Kant's Metaphysics and Theory of Science. Greenwood Press, 1955 ISBN 978-0-8371-7154-8 (elucidates Kant's most fundamental concepts in their historical context)
Palmquist, Stephen. Kant's System of Perspectives: an architectonic interpretation of the Critical philosophy. Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 1993. ISBN 0-8191-8927-8
Seung, T.K. 2007. Kant: a Guide for the Perplexed. London: Continuum. ISBN 0-8264-8580-4
Satyananda Giri. Kant. Durham, CT: Strategic Publishing Group, 2010. ISBN 978-1-60911-686-6
Scruton, Roger. Kant: a Very Short Introduction. Oxford University Press, 2001. ISBN 0-19-280199-6 (provides a brief account of his life, and a lucid introduction to the three major critiques)
Uleman, Jennifer. An Introduction to Kant's Moral Philosophy. Cambridge University Press, 2010. ISBN 978-0-521-13644-0
Luchte, James. Kant's Critique of Pure Reason. Bloomsbury Publishing, 2007. ISBN 978-0-8264-9322-4
Deleuze, Gilles. Kant's Critical Philosophy: The Doctrine of the Faculties. The Athlone Press, 1983. ISBN 0-485-11249-3
Biography and historical context

Bader, Ralph (2008). "Kant, Immanuel (1724–1804)". In Hamowy, Ronald. The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; Cato Institute. pp. 269–71. doi:10.4135/9781412965811.n161. ISBN 978-1-4129-6580-4. LCCN 2008009151. OCLC 750831024.
Beck, Lewis White. Early German Philosophy: Kant and his Predecessors. Harvard University Press, 1969. (a survey of Kant's intellectual background)
Beiser, Frederick C. The Fate of Reason: German Philosophy from Kant to Fichte. Harvard University Press, 1987.
Beiser, Frederick C. German Idealism: the Struggle against Subjectivism, 1781–1801. Harvard University Press, 2002
Cassirer, Ernst. Kant's Life and Thought. Translation of Kants Leben und Lehre. Trans., Jame S. Haden, intr. Stephan Körner. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1981.
Chamberlain, Houston Stewart. Immanuel Kant – a study and a comparison with Goethe, Leonardo da Vinci, Bruno, Plato and Descartes, the authorised translation from the German by Lord Redesdale, with his 'Introduction', The Bodley Head, London, 1914, (2 volumes).
Gulyga, Arsenij. Immanuel Kant: His Life and Thought. Trans., Marijan Despaltović. Boston: Birkhäuser, 1987.
Johnson, G.R. (ed.). Kant on Swedenborg. Dreams of a Spirit-Seer and Other Writings. Swedenborg Foundation, 2002. (new translation and analysis, many supplementary texts)
Lehner, Ulrich L., Kants Vorsehungskonzept auf dem Hintergrund der deutschen Schulphilosophie und –theologie (Leiden: 2007) (Kant's concept of Providence and its background in German school philosophy and theology)
Pinkard, Terry. German Philosophy, 1760–1860: the Legacy of Idealism. Cambridge, 2002.
Pippin, Robert. Idealism as Modernism. Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Sassen, Brigitte (ed.). Kant's Early Critics: the Empiricist Critique of the Theoretical Philosophy, Cambridge, 2000.
Schabert, Joseph A. "Kant's Influence on his Successors", The American Catholic Quarterly Review, Vol. XLVII, January 1922.
Collections of essays

Firestone, Chris L. and Palmquist, Stephen (eds.). Kant and the New Philosophy of Religion. Notre Dame: Indiana University Press, 2006. ISBN 0-253-21800-4
Förster, Eckart (ed.). Kant's Transcendental Deductions:. The Three 'Critiques' and the 'Opus Postumum' Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1989. Includes an important essay by Dieter Henrich.
Guyer, Paul (ed.). The Cambridge Companion to Kant, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992. ISBN 0-521-36587-2, 0-521-36768-9. Excellent collection of papers that covers most areas of Kant's thought.
Mohanty, J.N. and Shahan, Robert W. (eds.). Essays on Kant's Critique of Pure Reason. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1982. ISBN 0-8061-1782-6
Phillips, Dewi et al. (eds.). Kant and Kierkegaard on Religion. New York: Palgrave Macmillian, 2000, ISBN 0-312-23234-9 Collection of essays about Kantian religion and its influence on Kierkegaardian and contemporary philosophy of religion.
Proceedings of the International Kant Congresses. Several Congresses (numbered) edited by various publishers.
Theoretical philosophy

Allison, Henry. Kant's Transcendental Idealism. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1983, 2004. ISBN 0-300-03629-9, 0-300-03002-9 (a very influential defense of Kant's idealism, recently revised).
Ameriks, Karl. Kant's Theory of Mind: An Analysis of the Paralogisms of Pure Reason. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1982 (one of the first detailed studies of the Dialectic in English).
Banham, Gary. Kant's Transcendental Imagination. London and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006.
Deleuze, Gilles. Kant's Critical Philosophy. Trans., Hugh Tomlinson and Barbara Habberjam. University of Minnesota Press, 1984. ISBN 0-8166-1341-9, 0-8166-1436-9
Gram, Moltke S. The Transcendental Turn: The Foundation of Kant's Idealism. Gainesville: University Presses of Florida, 1984. ISBN 0-8130-0787-9
Greenberg, Robert. Kant's Theory of A Priori Knowledge. Penn State Press, 2001 ISBN 0-271-02083-0
Guyer, Paul. Kant and the Claims of Knowledge. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987 (modern defense of the view that Kant's theoretical philosophy is a "patchwork" of ill-fitting arguments).
Heidegger, Martin. Kant and the Problem of Metaphysics. Trans., Richard Taft. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1997. ISBN 0-253-21067-4
Henrich, Dieter. The Unity of Reason: Essays on Kant's Philosophy. Ed. with introduction by Richard L. Velkley; trans. Jeffrey Edwards et al. Harvard University Press, 1994. ISBN 0-674-92905-5
Kemp Smith, Norman. A Commentary to Kant's 'Critique of Pure Reason. London: Macmillan, 1930 (influential commentary on the first Critique, recently reprinted).
Kitcher, Patricia. Kant's Transcendental Psychology. New York: Oxford University Press, 1990.
Longuenesse, Béatrice. Kant and the Capacity to Judge. Princeton University Press, 1998. ISBN 0-691-04348-5. (argues that the notion of judgment provides the key to understanding the overall argument of the first Critique)
Melnick, Arthur. Kant's Analogies of Experience. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1973. (important study of Kant's Analogies, including his defense of the principle of causality)
Paton, H.J. Kant's Metaphysic of Experience: a Commentary on the First Half of the Kritik der reinen Vernunft. Two volumes. London: Macmillan, 1936. (extensive study of Kant's theoretical philosophy)
Pippin, Robert B.. Kant's Theory of Form: An Essay on the Critique of Pure Reason. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1982. (influential examination of the formal character of Kant's work)
Schopenhauer, Arthur. Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung. Erster Band. Anhang. Kritik der Kantischen Philosophie. F.A. Brockhaus, Leipzig 1859 (In English: Arthur Schopenhauer, New York: Dover Press, Volume I, Appendix, "Criticism of the Kantian Philosophy", ISBN 0-486-21761-2)
Schott, Robin May (1997). Feminist interpretations of Immanuel Kant. University Park, Pennsylvania: Pennsylvania State University Press. ISBN 978-0-271-01676-4.
Seung, T.K. Kant's Transcendental Logic. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1969.
Strawson, P.F. The Bounds of Sense: An Essay on Kant's Critique of Pure Reason. Routledge, 1989 (the work that revitalized the interest of contemporary analytic philosophers in Kant).
Sturm, Thomas, Kant und die Wissenschaften vom Menschen. Paderborn: Mentis Verlag, 2009. ISBN 3-89785-608-5, 978-3-89785-608-0. review (Treats Kant's anthropology and his views on psychology and history in relation to his philosophy of science.)
Tonelli, Giorgio. Kant's Critique of Pure Reason within the Tradition of Modern Logic. A Commentary on its History. Hildesheim, Olms 1994
Werkmeister, W.H., Kant: The Architectonic and Development of His Philosophy, Open Court Publishing Co., La Salle, Ill.; 1980 ISBN 0-87548-345-3 (it treats, as a whole, the architectonic and development of Kant's philosophy from 1755 through the Opus postumum.)
Wolff, Robert Paul. Kant's Theory of Mental Activity: A Commentary on the Transcendental Analytic of the Critique of Pure Reason. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1963. (detailed and influential commentary on the first part of the Critique of Pure Reason)
Yovel, Yirmiahu. Kant and the Philosophy of History. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1980. (review)
Practical philosophy

Allison, Henry. Kant's Theory of Freedom. Cambridge University Press 1990.
Banham, Gary. Kant's Practical Philosophy: From Critique to Doctrine. Palgrave Macmillan, 2003.
Dorschel, Andreas. Die idealistische Kritik des Willens: Versuch über die Theorie der praktischen Subjektivität bei Kant und Hegel. Hamburg: Felix Meiner, 1992 (Schriften zur Transzendentalphilosophie 10) ISBN 3-7873-1046-0.
Friedman, Michael (June 1998). "Kantian themes in contemporary philosophy". Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volumes. 72 (1): 111–30. doi:10.1111/1467-8349.00038. JSTOR 4107015.
Koorsgaard, Christine M. The Sources of Normativity. Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Michalson, Gordon E. Fallen Freedom: Kant on Radical Evil and Moral Regeneration. Cambridge University Press, 1990.
Michalson, Gordon E. Kant and the Problem of God. Blackwell Publishers, 1999.
Paton, H.J. The Categorical Imperative: A Study in Kant's Moral Philosophy. University of Pennsylvania Press 1971.
Rawls, John. Lectures on the History of Moral Philosophy. Cambridge, 2000.
Seung, T.K. Kant's Platonic Revolution in Moral and Political Philosophy. Johns Hopkins, 1994.
Wolff, Robert Paul. The Autonomy of Reason: A Commentary on Kant's Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals. New York: HarperCollins, 1974. ISBN 0-06-131792-6.
Wood, Allen. Kant's Ethical Thought. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
Aesthetics

Allison, Henry. Kant's Theory of Taste: A Reading of the Critique of Aesthetic Judgment. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2001.
Banham, Gary. Kant and the Ends of Aesthetics. London and New York: Macmillan Press, 2000.
Clewis, Robert. The Kantian Sublime and the Revelation of Freedom. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Crawford, Donald. Kant's Aesthetic Theory. Wisconsin, 1974.
Doran, Robert. The Theory of the Sublime from Longinus to Kant. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2015.
Guyer, Paul. Kant and the Claims of Taste. Cambridge, Massachusetts and London, 1979.
Hammermeister, Kai. The German Aesthetic Tradition. Cambridge University Press, 2002.
Immanuel Kant entry in Kelly, Michael (Editor in Chief) (1998) Encyclopedia of Aesthetics. New York, Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Kaplama, Erman. Cosmological Aesthetics through the Kantian Sublime and Nietzschean Dionysian. Lanham: UPA, Rowman & Littlefield, 2014.
Makkreel, Rudolf, Imagination and Interpretation in Kant. Chicago, 1990.
McCloskey, Mary. Kant's Aesthetic. SUNY, 1987.
Schaper, Eva. Studies in Kant's Aesthetics. Edinburgh, 1979.
Zammito, John H. The Genesis of Kant's Critique of Judgment. Chicago and London: Chicago University Press, 1992.
Zupancic, Alenka. Ethics of the Real: Kant and Lacan. Verso, 2000.
Philosophy of religion

Palmquist, Stephen. Kant's Critical Religion: Volume Two of Kant's System of Perspectives. Ashgate, 2000. ISBN 0-7546-1333-X
Perez, Daniel Omar. "Religión, Política y Medicina en Kant: El Conflicto de las Proposiciones". Cinta de Moebio. Revista de Epistemologia de Ciencias Sociales, v. 28, p. 91–103, 2007. Uchile.cl (Spanish)
Perpetual peace and international relations

Sir Harry Hinsley, Power and the Pursuit of Peace, Cambridge University Press, 1962.
Martin Wight, Four Seminal Thinkers in International Theory: Machiavelli, Grotius, Kant and Mazzini ed. Gabriele Wight & Brian Porter (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005).
Bennington, Geoffrey (December 2011). "Kant's open secret". Theory, Culture & Society. 28 (7–8): 26–40. doi:10.1177/0263276411423036.
Other works

Botul, Jean-Baptiste. La vie sexuelle d'Emmanuel Kant. Paris, FR; Éd. Mille et une Nuits, 2008. ISBN 978-2-84205-424-3
Caygill, Howard. A Kant Dictionary. Oxford, UK; Cambridge, Massachusetts, US: Blackwell Reference, 1995. ISBN 0-631-17534-2, 0-631-17535-0
Derrida, Jacques. Mochlos; or, The Conflict of the Faculties. Columbia University, 1980.
Kelly, Michael. Kant's Ethics and Schopenhauer's Criticism, London: Swan Sonnenschein 1910. [Reprinted 2010 Nabu Press, ISBN 978-1-171-70795-0]
Mosser, Kurt. Necessity and Possibility; The Logical Strategy of Kant's Critique of Pure Reason. Catholic University of America Press, 2008. ISBN 978-0-8132-1532-7
White, Mark D. Kantian Ethics and Economics: Autonomy, Dignity, and Character. Stanford University Press, 2011. ISBN 978-0-8047-6894-8. (Reviewed in The Montreal Review)
Contemporary philosophy with a Kantian influence

Assiter, Alison (July 2013). Kant and Kierkegaard on freedom and evil. Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement. 72. pp. 275–96. Bibcode:1995kppp.book.....O. doi:10.1017/S1358246113000155.
Bird, Graham (June 1998). "Kantian themes in contemporary philosophy". Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volumes. 72 (1): 131–52. doi:10.1111/1467-8349.00039. JSTOR 4107015.
Guyer, Paul. Knowledge, Reason, and Taste: Kant's Response to Hume. Princeton University Press, 2008.
Hanna, Robert, Kant and the Foundations of Analytic Philosophy. Clarendon Press, 2004.
Hanna, Robert, Kant, Science, and Human Nature. Clarendon Press, 2006.
Herman, Barbara. The Practice of Moral Judgement. Harvard University Press, 1993.
Hill, Judith M. (June 1987). "Pornography and degradation". Hypatia: A Journal of Feminist Philosophy. 2 (2): 39–54. doi:10.1111/j.1527-2001.1987.tb01064.x. JSTOR 3810015. (A Kantian approach to the issue of pornography and degradation.)
Korsgaard, Christine. Creating the Kingdom of Ends. Cambridge, New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996. ISBN 0-521-49644-6, 0-521-49962-3 (not a commentary, but a defense of a broadly Kantian approach to ethics)
McDowell, John. Mind and World. Harvard University Press, 1994. ISBN 0-674-57609-8. (offers a Kantian solution to a dilemma in contemporary epistemology regarding the relation between mind and world)
O'Neill, Onora (June 1998). "Kant on duties regarding nonrational nature". Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volumes. 72 (1): 211–28. doi:10.1111/1467-8349.00043. JSTOR 4107017.
Parfit, Derek. On What Matters (2 vols.). New York: Oxford University Press, 2011. ISBN 978-0-19-926592-3
Pinker, Steven. The Stuff of Thought. Viking Press, 2007. ISBN 978-0-670-06327-7. (Chapter 4 "Cleaving the Air" discusses Kant's anticipation of modern cognitive science)
Wood, Allen W.. Kant's Ethical Thought. Cambridge, New York: Cambridge University Press, 1999. ISBN 0-521-64836-X. (comprehensive, in-depth study of Kant's ethics, with emphasis on formula of humanity as most accurate formulation of the categorical imperative)
Wood, Allen W. (June 1998). "Kant on duties regarding nonrational nature". Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volumes. 72 (1): 189–210. doi:10.1111/1467-8349.00042. JSTOR 4107017.
External links
Immanuel Kant
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Data from Wikidata
Works by Immanuel Kant at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Immanuel Kant at Internet Archive
Works by Immanuel Kant at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
KantPapers, authors and papers database powered by PhilPapers, focused on Kant, and located at Cornell University
Immanuel Kant at the Encyclopædia Britannica
Immanuel Kant in the Christian Cyclopedia
Works by Immanuel Kant at Duisburg-Essen University
Stephen Palmquist's Glossary of Kantian Terminology
Kant's Ethical Theory – Kantian ethics explained, applied and evaluated
Notes on Utilitarianism – A conveniently brief survey of Kant's Utilitarianism
Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Immanuel Kant: An Overview
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Immanuel Kant
Articles related to Immanuel Kant
Authority control Edit this at Wikidata	
BIBSYS: 90066754 BNE: XX1002482 BNF: cb11909393p (data) GND: 118559796 ISNI: 0000 0001 2282 4025 LCCN: n79021614 MusicBrainz: 871df78f-da37-417c-a898-a5de1f9a7ef0 MGP: 106921 NDL: 00445131 NKC: jn19990004171 NLA: 35259064 RKD: 447563 ICCU: IT\ICCU\CFIV\000707 SELIBR: 192570 SNAC: w62r3q53 SUDOC: 02694507X ULAN: 500107055 VIAF: 82088490 WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 82088490
Categories: Immanuel Kant1724 births1804 deaths18th-century German philosophers18th-century German writers18th-century philosophers18th-century Prussian peopleAge of EnlightenmentContinental philosophersEarly Modern philosophersEnlightenment philosophersEpistemologistsEthicistsGerman agnosticsGerman anthropologistsGerman classical liberalsGerman ethicistsGerman idealismGerman logiciansGerman LutheransGerman nationalistsGerman philosophersGerman political theoristsIdealistsKantianismKantian philosophersLogiciansMembers of the Prussian Academy of SciencesMetaphysiciansMoral philosophersNatural philosophersOntologistsPeople from KönigsbergPeople of the Age of EnlightenmentPhilosophers of artPhilosophers of educationPhilosophers of ethics and moralityPhilosophers of lawPhilosophers of literaturePhilosophers of logicPhilosophers of mindPhilosophers of religionPhilosophers of sciencePhilosophers of sexualityPhilosophers of social sciencePhilosophy writersPolitical liberals (international relations)RationalistsUniversity of Königsberg alumniUniversity of Königsberg faculty
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote
Wikisource

Languages
Башҡортса
Беларуская
Deutsch
Français
Latina
Lietuvių
Polski
Русский
Українська
141 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 16 March 2019, at 15:34 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Turkish Straits
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
Turkish Straits is located in EuropeBosphorusDardanelles
A map depicting the locations of the Turkish Straits, with the Bosphorus in red, and the Dardanelles in yellow. The sovereign national territory of Turkey is highlighted in green.

The Bosphorus (red), the Dardanelles (yellow), and the Sea of Marmara in between, are known collectively as the Turkish Straits

Satellite image of the Bosphorus, taken from the ISS in April 2004. The body of water at the top is the Black Sea, the one at the bottom is the Marmara Sea, and the Bosphorus is the winding vertical waterway that connects the two. The western banks of the Bosphorus constitute the geographic starting point of the European continent, while the banks to the east are the geographic beginnings of the continent of Asia. The city of Istanbul is visible along both banks.

Satellite image of the Dardanelles, taken from the Landsat 7 in September 2006. The body of water at the upper left is the Aegean Sea, while the one on the upper right is the Sea of Marmara. The long, narrow upper peninsula is Gallipoli (Turkish: Gelibolu), and constitutes the banks of the continent of Europe, while the lower peninsula is Troad (Turkish: Biga) and constitutes the banks of the continent of Asia. The Dardanelles is the tapered waterway running diagonally between the two peninsulas, from the northeast to the southwest. The city of Çanakkale is visible along the shores of the lower peninsula, centered at the only point where a sharp outcropping juts into the otherwise-linear Dardanelles.
The Turkish Straits (Turkish: Türk Boğazları) are a series of internationally significant waterways in northwestern Turkey that connect the Aegean and Mediterranean seas to the Black Sea. They consist of the Dardanelles, the Sea of Marmara, and the Bosphorus, all part of the sovereign sea territory of Turkey and subject to the regime of internal waters.

Located in the western part of the landmass of Eurasia, the Turkish Straits are conventionally considered the boundary between the continents of Europe and Asia, as well as the dividing line between European Turkey and Asian Turkey. Owing to their strategic importance in international commerce, politics, and warfare, the Turkish Straits have played a significant role in European and world history, and have since been governed in accordance with the 1936 Montreux Convention.


Contents
1	Geography
2	Straits Question
3	See also
4	References
5	Sources
Geography
As maritime waterways, the Turkish Straits connect various seas along the Eastern Mediterranean, the Balkans, the Near East, and Western Eurasia. Specifically, the Straits allows maritime connections from the Black Sea all the way to the Aegean and Mediterranean Seas, the Atlantic Ocean via Gibraltar, and the Indian Ocean through the Suez Canal, making them crucial international waterways, in particular for the passage of goods coming in from Russia.

The Turkish Straits are made up of the following waterways;

The Bosphorus (also spelled Bosporus; Turkish: Boğaziçi or İstanbul Boğazı, "Istanbul Strait"), about 30 kilometers (19 mi) long and only 700 meters (2,300 ft) wide, connects the Sea of Marmara with the Black Sea in the north. It runs through the city of Istanbul, making it a city located on two continents. It is crossed by three suspension bridges (the Bosphorus Bridge, the Fatih Sultan Mehmet Bridge and the Yavuz Sultan Selim Bridge) and the underwater Marmaray rail tunnel. There is a second underwater tunnel currently under construction for road users. There are plans for further crossings being debated at various stages.
The Dardanelles (Turkish: Çanakkale Boğazı, "Çanakkale Strait"), 68 km (42 mi) long and 1.2 km (0.75 mi) wide, connects the Sea of Marmara with the Mediterranean in the southwest, near the city of Çanakkale. In classical antiquity, the Dardanelles strait was known as the Hellespont. The strait and the Gallipoli (Gelibolu) peninsula on its western shoreline were the scene of the Battle of Gallipoli during the First World War. Currently, there are no crossings across the strait, but plans have been offered in recent years for a suspension bridge project as part of proposed expansions to the national highway network.
Developments of economic activities threaten marine ecosystem including endemic dolphins and harbour porpoises.[1]

Straits Question
Main article: Turkish Straits crisis
The Straits have been of urgent maritime strategic importance since the Trojan War was fought near the Aegean entrance. In the declining days of the Ottoman Empire the "Straits Question" involved the diplomats of Europe and the Ottoman Empire.

By the terms of the London Straits Convention concluded on July 13, 1841, between the Great Powers of Europe — Russia, the United Kingdom, France, Austria and Prussia — the "ancient rule" of the Ottoman Empire was re-established by closing the Turkish straits to all warships whatsoever, barring those of the sultan's allies during wartime. It thus benefited British naval power at the expense of Russian as the latter lacked direct access for its navy to the Mediterranean.[2]

The treaty is one in a series dealing with access to the Bosphorus, the Sea of Marmara, and the Dardanelles. It evolved from the secret 1833 Treaty of Hünkâr İskelesi (Unkiar Skelessi), in which the Ottoman Empire guaranteed exclusive use of the Straits to "Black Sea Powers" (i.e., Ottoman Empire and Russian Empire) warships in the case of a general war.

The modern treaty controlling relations is the 1936 Montreux Convention Regarding the Regime of the Turkish Straits, which is still in force. It gives the Republic of Turkey control over warships entering the straits but guarantees the free passage of civilian vessels in peacetime.

See also
International law
List of maritime incidents in the Turkish Straits
Marmara Region
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
References
 Khan S.. 2013. An Economic Boom in Turkey Takes a Toll on Marine Life. Yale Environment 360. Retrieved on September 06, 2017
 Rozakis & Stagos 1987, pp. 24–25.
Sources
Gerolymatos, André (2014). "The Turkish Straits: History, Politics and Strategic Dilemmas". Ocean Yearbook. 28: 58–79. doi:10.1163/22116001-02801003.
Rozakis, Christos L.; Stagos, Petros N. (1987). The Turkish Straits. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. ISBN 90-247-3464-9.
Coordinates: 40.7225°N 28.2247°E

Categories: Turkish StraitsInternational straitsStraits of Turkey
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons

Languages
Беларуская
Español
Français
Português
Русский
Türkçe
Українська
Tiếng Việt
中文
13 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 2 July 2018, at 13:25 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
  (Redirected from Hegel)
Jump to navigationJump to search
"Hegel" redirects here. For other uses, see Hegel (disambiguation).
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
Hegel portrait by Schlesinger 1831.jpg
Portrait by Jakob Schlesinger, 1831
Born	August 27, 1770
Stuttgart, Duchy of Württemberg
Died	November 14, 1831 (aged 61)
Berlin, Kingdom of Prussia
Residence	Germany
Nationality	German
Education	Gymnasium illustre zu Stuttgart
Tübinger Stift, University of Tübingen (MA, 1790)[1]
University of Jena (PhD, 1801)
Era	19th-century philosophy
Region	Western philosophy
School	
Continental philosophy
German idealism
Objective idealism
Absolute idealism
Hegelianism
Historicism[2]
Naturphilosophie
Epistemic coherentism[3]
Conceptualism[4]
Empirical realism[5]
Coherence theory of truth[6]
Institutions	University of Jena
(1801–1806)
University of Heidelberg
(1816–1818)
University of Berlin
(1818–1831)
Thesis	Dissertatio Philosophica de Orbitis Planetarium (Philosophical Dissertation on the Orbits of the Planets) (1801)
Academic advisors	Johann Friedrich LeBret [de] (MA advisor)[7]
Notable students	Johann Eduard Erdmann
Main interests
Metaphysics
Epistemology
Naturphilosophie
Philosophy of history
Political philosophy
Logic
Aesthetics
Notable ideas
Absolute idealism
Hegelian dialectic
Master–slave dialectic
Aufheben ("sublation")
Geist ("mind/spirit")
Sittlichkeit ("ethical order")
Alienation[8]
Dialectical phenomenology
The three moments
of the concept: universality,
particularity, and individuality[9]
(Allgemeinheit, Besonderheit,
Einzelheit)[10]
Abstract particularity[11]
The abstract–concrete distinction[12]
Judgement of history
"The true is the whole"[13]
Rationality alone is real[14]
Logical holism
Panlogism
Distinction between
critical Verstandesmetaphysik[15]
(metaphysics of Understanding) and
speculative Vernunftsmetaphysik
(metaphysics of Reason)[16]
Inferentialism[17][18]
The negative/positive liberty distinction
The civil society/state distinction
Volksgeist
Influences[show]
Influenced[show]
Signature
Hegel Unterschrift.svg
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (/ˈheɪɡəl/,[26][27] German: [ˈɡeːɔɐ̯k ˈvɪlhɛlm ˈfʁiːdʁɪç ˈheːɡl̩];[27][28][29][30][31] August 27, 1770 – November 14, 1831) was a German philosopher and an important figure of German idealism. He achieved wide recognition in his day and—while primarily influential within the continental tradition of philosophy—has become increasingly influential in the analytic tradition as well.[32] Although Hegel remains a divisive figure, his canonical stature within Western philosophy is universally recognized.

Hegel's principal achievement was his development of a distinctive articulation of idealism, sometimes termed absolute idealism,[33] in which the dualisms of, for instance, mind and nature and subject and object are overcome. His philosophy of spirit conceptually integrates psychology, the state, history, art, religion and philosophy. His account of the master–slave dialectic has been highly influential, especially in 20th-century France.[34] Of special importance is his concept of spirit (Geist, sometimes also translated as "mind") as the historical manifestation of the logical concept and the "sublation" (Aufhebung, integration without elimination or reduction) of seemingly contradictory or opposing factors: examples include the apparent opposition between nature and freedom and between immanence and transcendence. Hegel has been seen in the 20th century as the originator of the thesis, antithesis, synthesis triad,[35] but as an explicit phrase it originated with Johann Gottlieb Fichte.[36]

Hegel has influenced many thinkers and writers whose own positions vary widely.[37] Karl Barth described Hegel as a "Protestant Aquinas"[38] while Maurice Merleau-Ponty wrote that "all the great philosophical ideas of the past century—the philosophies of Marx and Nietzsche, phenomenology, German existentialism, and psychoanalysis—had their beginnings in Hegel."[39] 

Contents
1	Life
1.1	Early years
1.1.1	Childhood
1.1.2	Tübingen (1788–1793)
1.1.3	Bern (1793–1796) and Frankfurt (1797–1801)
1.2	Career years
1.2.1	Jena, Bamberg and Nuremberg (1801–1816)
1.2.2	Heidelberg and Berlin (1816–1831)
2	Philosophical work
2.1	Freedom
2.2	Progress
2.3	Civil society
2.4	State
2.5	Heraclitus
2.6	Religion
3	Works
3.1	Posthumous works
4	Legacy
4.1	Reading Hegel
4.2	Left and right Hegelianism
4.3	Triads
4.4	Renaissance
4.5	Criticism
5	Selected works
5.1	Published during Hegel's lifetime
5.2	Published posthumously
6	See also
7	Notes
8	Further reading
9	External links
9.1	Audio
9.2	Video
9.3	Societies
9.4	Hegel texts online
Life
Early years
Childhood

The birthplace of Hegel in Stuttgart, which now houses the Hegel Museum
He was born on August 27, 1770 in Stuttgart, capital of the Duchy of Württemberg in southwestern Germany. Christened Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, he was known as Wilhelm to his close family. His father, Georg Ludwig, was Rentkammersekretär (secretary to the revenue office) at the court of Karl Eugen, Duke of Württemberg.[40]:2–3, 745 Hegel's mother, Maria Magdalena Louisa (née Fromm), was the daughter of a lawyer at the High Court of Justice at the Württemberg court. She died of a "bilious fever" (Gallenfieber) when Hegel was thirteen. Hegel and his father also caught the disease, but they narrowly survived.[41] Hegel had a sister, Christiane Luise (1773–1832); and a brother, Georg Ludwig (1776–1812), who was to perish as an officer in Napoleon's Russian campaign of 1812.[40]:4

At the age of three, he went to the German School. When he entered the Latin School two years later, he already knew the first declension, having been taught it by his mother. In 1776, he entered Stuttgart's gymnasium illustre and during his adolescence read voraciously, copying lengthy extracts in his diary. Authors he read include the poet Friedrich Gottlieb Klopstock and writers associated with the Enlightenment, such as Christian Garve and Gotthold Ephraim Lessing. His studies at the Gymnasium were concluded with his Abiturrede ("graduation speech") entitled "The abortive state of art and scholarship in Turkey"[40]:16 ("den verkümmerten Zustand der Künste und Wissenschaften unter den Türken").[42]

Tübingen (1788–1793)
At the age of eighteen, Hegel entered the Tübinger Stift (a Protestant seminary attached to the University of Tübingen), where he had as roommates the poet and philosopher Friedrich Hölderlin and the philosopher-to-be Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling.[43] Sharing a dislike for what they regarded as the restrictive environment of the Seminary, the three became close friends and mutually influenced each other's ideas. All greatly admired Hellenic civilization and Hegel additionally steeped himself in Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Lessing during this time.[44] They watched the unfolding of the French Revolution with shared enthusiasm. Schelling and Hölderlin immersed themselves in theoretical debates on Kantian philosophy, from which Hegel remained aloof. Hegel at this time envisaged his future as that of a Popularphilosoph, i.e. a "man of letters" who serves to make the abstruse ideas of philosophers accessible to a wider public; his own felt need to engage critically with the central ideas of Kantianism did not come until 1800.

Although the violence of the Reign of Terror in 1793 dampened Hegel's hopes, he continued to identify with the moderate Girondin faction and never lost his commitment to the principles of 1789, which he would express by drinking a toast to the storming of the Bastille every fourteenth of July.[45]

Bern (1793–1796) and Frankfurt (1797–1801)
Having received his theological certificate (Konsistorialexamen) from the Tübingen Seminary, Hegel became Hofmeister (house tutor) to an aristocratic family in Bern (1793–1796). During this period, he composed the text which has become known as the Life of Jesus and a book-length manuscript titled "The Positivity of the Christian Religion". His relations with his employers becoming strained, Hegel accepted an offer mediated by Hölderlin to take up a similar position with a wine merchant's family in Frankfurt, to which he relocated in 1797. Here, Hölderlin exerted an important influence on Hegel's thought.[40]:80 While in Frankfurt, Hegel composed the essay "Fragments on Religion and Love".[46] In 1799, he wrote another essay entitled "The Spirit of Christianity and Its Fate",[47] unpublished during his lifetime.

Also in 1797, the unpublished and unsigned manuscript of "The Oldest Systematic Program of German Idealism" was written. It was written in Hegel's hand, but thought to have been authored by either Hegel, Schelling, Hölderlin, or an unknown fourth person.[48]

Career years
Jena, Bamberg and Nuremberg (1801–1816)
In 1801, Hegel came to Jena with the encouragement of his old friend Schelling, who held the position of Extraordinary Professor at the University there. Hegel secured a position at the University as a Privatdozent (unsalaried lecturer) after submitting the inaugural dissertation De Orbitis Planetarum, in which he briefly criticized arguments that assert, based on Bode's Law or other arbitrary choice of mathematical series, that there must exist a planet between Mars and Jupiter.[49][50][51] Unbeknownst to Hegel, Giuseppe Piazzi had discovered the minor planet Ceres within that orbit on January 1, 1801.[50][51] Later in the year, Hegel's first book The Difference Between Fichte's and Schelling's Systems of Philosophy was completed. He lectured on "Logic and Metaphysics" and gave joint lectures with Schelling on an "Introduction to the Idea and Limits of True Philosophy" and held a "Philosophical Disputorium". In 1802, Schelling and Hegel founded a journal, the Kritische Journal der Philosophie (Critical Journal of Philosophy), to which they each contributed pieces until the collaboration was ended when Schelling left for Würzburg in 1803.

In 1805, the University promoted Hegel to the position of Extraordinary Professor (unsalaried) after he wrote a letter to the poet and minister of culture Johann Wolfgang Goethe protesting at the promotion of his philosophical adversary Jakob Friedrich Fries ahead of him.[40]:223 Hegel attempted to enlist the help of the poet and translator Johann Heinrich Voß to obtain a post at the newly renascent University of Heidelberg, but he failed; to his chagrin, Fries was later in the same year made Ordinary Professor (salaried) there.[40]:224–25


"Hegel and Napoleon in Jena" (illustration from Harper's Magazine, 1895), whose meeting became proverbial due to Hegel's notable use of Weltseele ("world-soul") in reference to Napoleon ("the world-soul on horseback", die Weltseele zu Pferde)[52]
With his finances drying up quickly, Hegel was now under great pressure to deliver his book, the long-promised introduction to his System. Hegel was putting the finishing touches to this book, The Phenomenology of Spirit, as Napoleon engaged Prussian troops on 14 October 1806 in the Battle of Jena on a plateau outside the city. On the day before the battle, Napoleon entered the city of Jena. Hegel recounted his impressions in a letter to his friend Friedrich Immanuel Niethammer:

I saw the Emperor – this world-soul [Weltseele] – riding out of the city on reconnaissance. It is indeed a wonderful sensation to see such an individual, who, concentrated here at a single point, astride a horse, reaches out over the world and masters it.[53]

Pinkard (2000) notes that Hegel's comment to Niethammer "is all the more striking since at that point he had already composed the crucial section of the Phenomenology in which he remarked that the Revolution had now officially passed to another land (Germany) that would complete 'in thought' what the Revolution had only partially accomplished in practice".[54] Although Napoleon chose not to close down Jena as he had other universities, the city was devastated and students deserted the university in droves, making Hegel's financial prospects even worse. The following February, Hegel's landlady Christiana Burkhardt (who had been abandoned by her husband) gave birth to their son Georg Ludwig Friedrich Fischer (1807–1831).[40]:192

In March 1807, Hegel moved to Bamberg, where Niethammer had declined and passed on to Hegel an offer to become editor of a newspaper, the Bamberger Zeitung [de]. Unable to find more suitable employment, Hegel reluctantly accepted. Ludwig Fischer and his mother (whom Hegel may have offered to marry following the death of her husband) stayed behind in Jena.[40]:238

In November 1808, Hegel was again through Niethammer, appointed headmaster of a Gymnasium in Nuremberg, a post he held until 1816. While in Nuremberg, Hegel adapted his recently published Phenomenology of Spirit for use in the classroom. Part of his remit being to teach a class called "Introduction to Knowledge of the Universal Coherence of the Sciences", Hegel developed the idea of an encyclopedia of the philosophical sciences, falling into three parts (logic, philosophy of nature and philosophy of spirit).[40]:337

In 1811, Hegel married Marie Helena Susanna von Tucher (1791–1855), the eldest daughter of a Senator. This period saw the publication of his second major work, the Science of Logic (Wissenschaft der Logik; 3 vols., 1812, 1813 and 1816), and the birth of his two legitimate sons, Karl Friedrich Wilhelm (1813–1901) and Immanuel Thomas Christian (1814–1891).

Heidelberg and Berlin (1816–1831)
Having received offers of a post from the Universities of Erlangen, Berlin and Heidelberg, Hegel chose Heidelberg, where he moved in 1816. Soon after, his illegitimate son Ludwig Fischer (now ten years old) joined the Hegel household in April 1817, having thus far spent his childhood in an orphanage[40]:354–55 as his mother had died in the meantime.[40]:356

Hegel published The Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences in Outline (1817) as a summary of his philosophy for students attending his lectures at Heidelberg.


Hegel with his Berlin students
Sketch by Franz Kugler
In 1818, Hegel accepted the renewed offer of the chair of philosophy at the University of Berlin, which had remained vacant since Johann Gottlieb Fichte's death in 1814. Here, Hegel published his Philosophy of Right (1821). Hegel devoted himself primarily to delivering his lectures; and his lecture courses on aesthetics, the philosophy of religion, the philosophy of history and the history of philosophy were published posthumously from lecture notes taken by his students. His fame spread and his lectures attracted students from all over Germany and beyond.

In 1819–1827, he made several trips to Weimar (twice), where he met Goethe, Brussels, the Northern Netherlands, Leipzig, Vienna through Prague and Paris.[55]

Hegel was appointed Rector of the University in October 1829, but his term as Rector ended in September 1830. Hegel was deeply disturbed by the riots for reform in Berlin in that year. In 1831, Frederick William III decorated him with the Order of the Red Eagle, 3rd Class for his service to the Prussian state.[55] In August 1831, a cholera epidemic reached Berlin and Hegel left the city, taking up lodgings in Kreuzberg. Now in a weak state of health, Hegel seldom went out. As the new semester began in October, Hegel returned to Berlin with the (mistaken) impression that the epidemic had largely subsided. By November 14, Hegel was dead. The physicians pronounced the cause of death as cholera, but it is likely he died from a different gastrointestinal disease. He is said to have uttered the last words "And he didn't understand me" before expiring.[56] In accordance with his wishes, Hegel was buried on November 16 in the Dorotheenstadt cemetery next to Fichte and Karl Wilhelm Ferdinand Solger.

Hegel's son Ludwig Fischer had died shortly before while serving with the Dutch army in Batavia and the news of his death never reached his father.[40]:548 Early the following year, Hegel's sister Christiane committed suicide by drowning. Hegel's remaining two sons—Karl, who became a historian; and Immanuel [de], who followed a theological path—lived long and safeguarded their father's Nachlaß and produced editions of his works.

Philosophical work
Portrait of Hegel by an unidentified artist
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
Hegelianism
Forerunners
Aristotle Böhme Rousseau Kant Goethe Fichte Hölderlin Schelling
Successors
Feuerbach Marx Stirner Gentile Lukács Kojève Adorno Habermas
Principal works
The Phenomenology of Spirit Science of Logic Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences Lectures on Aesthetics Elements of the Philosophy of Right Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion Lectures on the Philosophy of History Lectures on the History of Philosophy
Schools
Absolute idealism Hegelianism (dialectics) British idealism German idealism
Related topics
Right Hegelians Young Hegelians
vte
Freedom
Hegel's thinking can be understood as a constructive development within the broad tradition that includes Plato and Immanuel Kant. To this list, one could add Proclus, Meister Eckhart, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, Plotinus, Jakob Böhme, and Jean-Jacques Rousseau. What all these thinkers share, which distinguishes them from materialists like Epicurus and Thomas Hobbes and from empiricists like David Hume, is that they regard freedom or self-determination both as real and as having important ontological implications for soul or mind or divinity. This focus on freedom is what generates Plato's notion (in the Phaedo, Republic and Timaeus) of the soul as having a higher or fuller kind of reality than inanimate objects possess. While Aristotle criticizes Plato's "Forms", he preserves Plato's cornerstones of the ontological implications for self-determination: ethical reasoning, the soul's pinnacle in the hierarchy of nature, the order of the cosmos and an assumption with reasoned arguments for a prime mover. Kant imports Plato's high esteem of individual sovereignty to his considerations of moral and noumenal freedom as well as to God. All three find common ground on the unique position of humans in the scheme of things, known by the discussed categorical differences from animals and inanimate objects.

In his discussion of "Spirit" in his Encyclopedia, Hegel praises Aristotle's On the Soul as "by far the most admirable, perhaps even the sole, work of philosophical value on this topic".[57] In his Phenomenology of Spirit and his Science of Logic, Hegel's concern with Kantian topics such as freedom and morality and with their ontological implications is pervasive. Rather than simply rejecting Kant's dualism of freedom versus nature, Hegel aims to subsume it within "true infinity", the "Concept" (or "Notion": Begriff), "Spirit" and "ethical life" in such a way that the Kantian duality is rendered intelligible, rather than remaining a brute "given".

The reason why this subsumption takes place in a series of concepts is that Hegel's method in his Science of Logic and his Encyclopedia is to begin with basic concepts like "Being" and "Nothing" and to develop these through a long sequence of elaborations, including those already mentioned. In this manner, a solution that is reached in principle in the account of "true infinity" in the Science of Logic's chapter on "Quality" is repeated in new guises at later stages, all the way to "Spirit" and "ethical life" in the third volume of the Encyclopedia.

In this way, Hegel intends to defend the germ of truth in Kantian dualism against reductive or eliminative programs like those of materialism and empiricism. Like Plato, with his dualism of soul versus bodily appetites, Kant pursues the mind's ability to question its felt inclinations or appetites and to come up with a standard of "duty" (or, in Plato's case, "good") which transcends bodily restrictiveness. Hegel preserves this essential Platonic and Kantian concern in the form of infinity going beyond the finite (a process that Hegel in fact relates to "freedom" and the "ought"),[58]:133–136, 138 the universal going beyond the particular (in the Concept) and Spirit going beyond Nature. Hegel renders these dualities intelligible by (ultimately) his argument in the "Quality" chapter of the "Science of Logic". The finite has to become infinite in order to achieve reality. The idea of the absolute excludes multiplicity so the subjective and objective must achieve synthesis to become whole. This is because as Hegel suggests by his introduction of the concept of "reality",[58]:111 what determines itself—rather than depending on its relations to other things for its essential character—is more fully "real" (following the Latin etymology of "real", more "thing-like") than what does not. Finite things do not determine themselves because as "finite" things their essential character is determined by their boundaries over against other finite things, so in order to become "real" they must go beyond their finitude ("finitude is only as a transcending of itself").[58]:145

The result of this argument is that finite and infinite—and by extension, particular and universal, nature and freedom—do not face one another as two independent realities, but instead the latter (in each case) is the self-transcending of the former.[58]:146 Rather than stress the distinct singularity of each factor that complements and conflicts with others—without explanation—the relationship between finite and infinite (and particular and universal and nature and freedom) becomes intelligible as a progressively developing and self-perfecting whole.

Progress
The mystical writings of Jakob Böhme had a strong effect on Hegel.[59] Böhme had written that the Fall of Man was a necessary stage in the evolution of the universe. This evolution was itself the result of God's desire for complete self-awareness. Hegel was fascinated by the works of Kant, Rousseau and Johann Wolfgang Goethe and by the French Revolution. Modern philosophy, culture and society seemed to Hegel fraught with contradictions and tensions, such as those between the subject and object of knowledge, mind and nature, self and Other, freedom and authority, knowledge and faith, or the Enlightenment and Romanticism. Hegel's main philosophical project was to take these contradictions and tensions and interpret them as part of a comprehensive, evolving, rational unity that in different contexts he called "the absolute Idea" (Science of Logic, sections 1781–1783) or "absolute knowledge" (Phenomenology of Spirit, "(DD) Absolute Knowledge").

According to Hegel, the main characteristic of this unity was that it evolved through and manifested itself in contradiction and negation. Contradiction and negation have a dynamic quality that at every point in each domain of reality—consciousness, history, philosophy, art, nature and society—leads to further development until a rational unity is reached that preserves the contradictions as phases and sub-parts by lifting them up (Aufhebung) to a higher unity. This whole is mental because it is mind that can comprehend all of these phases and sub-parts as steps in its own process of comprehension. It is rational because the same, underlying, logical, developmental order underlies every domain of reality and is ultimately the order of self-conscious rational thought, although only in the later stages of development does it come to full self-consciousness. The rational, self-conscious whole is not a thing or being that lies outside of other existing things or minds. Rather, it comes to completion only in the philosophical comprehension of individual existing human minds who through their own understanding bring this developmental process to an understanding of itself. Hegel's thought is revolutionary to the extent that it is a philosophy of absolute negation—as long as absolute negation is at the center, systematization remains open, and makes it possible for human beings to become subjects.[60]

"Mind" and "Spirit" are the common English translations of Hegel's use of the German "Geist". Some[who?] have argued that either of these terms overly "psychologize" Hegel,[citation needed] implying a kind of disembodied, solipsistic consciousness like ghost or "soul". Geist combines the meaning of spirit—as in god, ghost, or mind—with an intentional force. In Hegel's early philosophy of nature (draft manuscripts written during his time at the University of Jena), Hegel's notion of "Geist" was tightly bound to the notion of "Aether", from which Hegel also derived the concepts of space and time, but in his later works (after Jena) he did not explicitly use his old notion of "Aether" anymore.[61]

Central to Hegel's conception of knowledge and mind (and therefore also of reality) was the notion of identity in difference—that is, that mind externalizes itself in various forms and objects that stand outside of it or opposed to it; and that through recognizing itself in them, is "with itself" in these external manifestations so that they are at one and the same time mind and other-than-mind. This notion of identity in difference, which is intimately bound up with his conception of contradiction and negativity, is a principal feature differentiating Hegel's thought from that of other philosophers.[citation needed]

Civil society
See also: Civil society
Hegel made the distinction between civil society and state in his Elements of the Philosophy of Right.[62] In this work, civil society (Hegel used the term "bürgerliche Gesellschaft" though it is now referred to as Zivilgesellschaft in German to emphasize a more inclusive community) was a stage in the dialectical relationship that occurs between Hegel's perceived opposites, the macro-community of the state and the micro-community of the family.[63] Broadly speaking, the term was split, like Hegel's followers, to the political left and right. On the left, it became the foundation for Karl Marx's civil society as an economic base;[64] to the right, it became a description for all non-state (and the state is the peak of the objective spirit) aspects of society, including culture, society and politics. This liberal distinction between political society and civil society was followed by Alexis de Tocqueville.[64] In fact, Hegel's distinctions as to what he meant by civil society are often unclear. For example, while it seems to be the case that he felt that a civil society such as the German society in which he lived was an inevitable movement of the dialectic, he made way for the crushing of other types of "lesser" and not fully realized types of civil society as these societies were not fully conscious or aware—as it were—as to the lack of progress in their societies. Thus, it was perfectly legitimate in the eyes of Hegel for a conqueror such as Napoleon to come along and destroy that which was not fully realized.

State
Hegel's State is the final culmination of the embodiment of freedom or right (Rechte) in the Elements of the Philosophy of Right. The State subsumes family and civil society and fulfills them. All three together are called "ethical life" (Sittlichkeit). The State involves three "moments". In a Hegelian State, citizens both know their place and choose their place. They both know their obligations and choose to fulfill their obligations. An individual's "supreme duty is to be a member of the state" (Elements of the Philosophy of Right, section 258). The individual has "substantial freedom in the state". The State is "objective spirit" so "it is only through being a member of the state that the individual himself has objectivity, truth, and ethical life" (section 258). Furthermore, every member both loves the State with genuine patriotism, but has transcended mere "team spirit" by reflectively endorsing their citizenship. Members of a Hegelian State are happy even to sacrifice their lives for the State.

Heraclitus
According to Hegel, "Heraclitus is the one who first declared the nature of the infinite and first grasped nature as in itself infinite, that is, its essence as process. The origin of philosophy is to be dated from Heraclitus. His is the persistent Idea that is the same in all philosophers up to the present day, as it was the Idea of Plato and Aristotle".[65] For Hegel, Heraclitus's great achievements were to have understood the nature of the infinite, which for Hegel includes understanding the inherent contradictoriness and negativity of reality; and to have grasped that reality is becoming or process and that "being" and "nothingness" are mere empty abstractions. According to Hegel, Heraclitus's "obscurity" comes from his being a true (in Hegel's terms "speculative") philosopher who grasped the ultimate philosophical truth and therefore expressed himself in a way that goes beyond the abstract and limited nature of common sense and is difficult to grasp by those who operate within common sense. Hegel asserted that in Heraclitus he had an antecedent for his logic: "[...] there is no proposition of Heraclitus which I have not adopted in my logic".[66]

Hegel cites a number of fragments of Heraclitus in his Lectures on the History of Philosophy.[67] One to which he attributes great significance is the fragment he translates as "Being is not more than Non-being", which he interprets to mean the following:

Sein und Nichts sei dasselbe
Being and non-being are the same.

Heraclitus does not form any abstract nouns from his ordinary use of "to be" and "to become" and in that fragment seems to be opposing any identity A to any other identity B, C and so on, which is not-A. However, Hegel interprets not-A as not existing at all, not nothing at all, which cannot be conceived, but indeterminate or "pure" being without particularity or specificity.[68] Pure being and pure non-being or nothingness are for Hegel pure abstractions from the reality of becoming and this is also how he interprets Heraclitus. This interpretation of Heraclitus cannot be ruled out, but even if present is not the main gist of his thought.

For Hegel, the inner movement of reality is the process of God thinking as manifested in the evolution of the universe of nature and thought; that is, Hegel argued that when fully and properly understood, reality is being thought by God as manifested in a person's comprehension of this process in and through philosophy. Since human thought is the image and fulfillment of God's thought, God is not ineffable (so incomprehensible as to be unutterable), but can be understood by an analysis of thought and reality. Just as humans continually correct their concepts of reality through a dialectical process, so God himself becomes more fully manifested through the dialectical process of becoming.

For his god, Hegel does not take the logos of Heraclitus but refers rather to the nous of Anaxagoras, although he may well have regarded them the same as he continues to refer to god's plan, which is identical to God. Whatever the nous thinks at any time is actual substance and is identical to limited being, but more remains to be thought in the substrate of non-being, which is identical to pure or unlimited thought.

The universe as becoming is therefore a combination of being and non-being. The particular is never complete in itself, but to find completion is continually transformed into more comprehensive, complex, self-relating particulars. The essential nature of being-for-itself is that it is free "in itself;" that is, it does not depend on anything else such as matter for its being. The limitations represent fetters, which it must constantly be casting off as it becomes freer and more self-determining.[69]

Although Hegel began his philosophizing with commentary on the Christian religion and often expresses the view that he is a Christian, his ideas of God are not acceptable to some Christians even though he has had a major influence on 19th- and 20th-century theology.

Religion
As a graduate of a Protestant seminary, Hegel's theological concerns were reflected in many of his writings and lectures.[70] Hegel's thoughts on the person of Jesus Christ stood out from the theologies of the Enlightenment. In his posthumously published Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion, Part 3, Hegel is shown as being particularly interested with the demonstrations of God's existence and the ontological proof.[71] He espouses that "God is not an abstraction but a concrete God [...] God, considered in terms of his eternal Idea, has to generate the Son, has to distinguish himself from himself; he is the process of differentiating, namely, love and Spirit". This means that Jesus as the Son of God is posited by God over against himself as other. Hegel sees both a relational unity and a metaphysical unity between Jesus and God the Father. To Hegel, Jesus is both divine and human. Hegel further attests that God (as Jesus) not only died, but "[...] rather, a reversal takes place: God, that is to say, maintains himself in the process, and the latter is only the death of death. God rises again to life, and thus things are reversed".

The philosopher Walter Kaufmann has argued that there was great stress on the sharp criticisms of traditional Christianity appearing in Hegel's so-called early theological writings. Kaufmann admits that Hegel treated many distinctively Christian themes and "sometimes could not resist equating" his conception of spirit (Geist) "with God, instead of saying clearly: in God I do not believe; spirit suffices me".[72] Kaufmann also points out that Hegel's references to God or to the divine—and also to spirit—drew on classical Greek as well as Christian connotations of the terms. Kaufmann goes on:

In addition to his beloved Greeks, Hegel saw before him the example of Spinoza and, in his own time, the poetry of Goethe, Schiller, and Hölderlin, who also liked to speak of gods and the divine. So he, too, sometimes spoke of God and, more often, of the divine; and because he occasionally took pleasure in insisting that he was really closer to this or that Christian tradition than some of the theologians of his time, he has sometimes been understood to have been a Christian.[73]

According to Hegel himself, his philosophy was consistent with Christianity.[74] This led Hegelian philosopher, jurist and politician Carl Friedrich Göschel [de] (1784–1861) to write a treatise demonstrating the consistency of Hegel's philosophy with the Christian doctrine of the immortality of the human soul. Göschel's book on this subject was titled Von den Beweisen für die Unsterblichkeit der menschlichen Seele im Lichte der spekulativen Philosophie: eine Ostergabe (Berlin: Verlag von Duncker und Humblot, 1835).[75][76][77]

Hegel seemed to have an ambivalent relationship with magic, myth and Paganism. He formulates an early philosophical example of a disenchantment narrative, arguing that Judaism was responsible both for realizing the existence of Geist and, by extension, for separating nature from ideas of spiritual and magical forces and challenging polytheism.[78] However, Hegel's manuscript "The Oldest Systematic Program of German Idealism" suggests that Hegel was concerned about the perceived decline in myth and enchantment in his age, and that he therefore called for a "new myth" to fill the cultural vacuum.[79]

Works
Hegel published four works during his lifetime:
(1) The Phenomenology of Spirit (or The Phenomenology of Mind), his account of the evolution of consciousness from sense-perception to absolute knowledge, published in 1807.

(2) Science of Logic, the logical and metaphysical core of his philosophy, in three volumes (1812, 1813 and 1816, respectively), with a revised first volume published in 1831.

(3) Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences, a summary of his entire philosophical system, which was originally published in 1816 and revised in 1827 and 1830.

(4) Elements of the Philosophy of Right, his political philosophy, published in 1820.

Posthumous works
During the last ten years of his life, Hegel did not publish another book, but thoroughly revised the Encyclopedia (second edition, 1827; third, 1830).[80] In his political philosophy, he criticized Karl Ludwig von Haller's reactionary work, which claimed that laws were not necessary. He also published some articles early in his career and during his Berlin period. A number of other works on the philosophy of history, religion, aesthetics and the history of philosophy[81] were compiled from the lecture notes of his students and published posthumously.

Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (1996) [1892 Kegan Paul]. Haldane, Elizabeth Sanderson, ed. Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der Philosophie [Hegel's Lectures on the history of philosophy]. Humanities Press International. ISBN 978-0-391-03957-5. (full text at Internet Archive) (see also Lectures on the History of Philosophy)
Legacy

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
Find sources: "Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (August 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Hegel's tombstone in Berlin
See also: Hegelianism
There are views of Hegel's thought as a representation of the summit of early 19th-century Germany's movement of philosophical idealism. It would come to have a profound impact on many future philosophical schools, including schools that opposed Hegel's specific dialectical idealism, such as existentialism, the historical materialism of Marx, historism and British Idealism.

Hegel's influence was immense both within philosophy and in the other sciences. Throughout the 19th century many chairs of philosophy around Europe were held by Hegelians and Søren Kierkegaard, Ludwig Feuerbach, Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels—among many others—were all deeply influenced by, but also strongly opposed to many of the central themes of Hegel's philosophy. Scholars continue to find and point out Hegelian influences and approaches in a wide range of theoretical and/or learned works, such as Carl von Clausewitz's magnum opus on strategic thought, On War (1831).[82] After less than a generation, Hegel's philosophy was suppressed and even banned by the Prussian right-wing and was firmly rejected by the left-wing in multiple official writings.

After the period of Bruno Bauer, Hegel's influence did not make itself felt again until the philosophy of British Idealism and the 20th-century Hegelian Western Marxism that began with György Lukács. The more recent movement of communitarianism has a strong Hegelian influence.

Reading Hegel
Some of Hegel's writing was intended for those with advanced knowledge of philosophy, although his Encyclopedia was intended as a textbook in a university course. Nevertheless, Hegel assumes that his readers are well-versed in Western philosophy. Especially crucial are Aristotle, Immanuel Kant and Kant's immediate successors, most prominently Johann Gottlieb Fichte and Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling. Those without this background would be well-advised to begin with one of the many general introductions to his thought. As is always the case, difficulties are magnified for those reading him in translation. In fact, Hegel himself argues in his Science of Logic that the German language was particularly conducive to philosophical thought.[83]

According to Walter Kaufmann, the basic idea of Hegel's works, especially the Phenomenology of Spirit, is that a philosopher should not "confine him or herself to views that have been held but penetrate these to the human reality they reflect". In other words, it is not enough to consider propositions, or even the content of consciousness; "it is worthwhile to ask in every instance what kind of spirit would entertain such propositions, hold such views, and have such a consciousness. Every outlook in other words, is to be studied not merely as an academic possibility but as an existential reality".[84] Kaufmann has argued that as unlikely as it may sound, it is not the case that Hegel was unable to write clearly, but that Hegel felt that "he must and should not write in the way in which he was gifted".[85]

Left and right Hegelianism
Some historians have spoken of Hegel's influence as represented by two opposing camps. The Right Hegelians, the allegedly direct disciples of Hegel at the Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität, advocated a Protestant orthodoxy and the political conservatism of the post-Napoleon Restoration period. Today this faction continues among conservative Protestants, such as the Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod, which was founded by missionaries from Germany when the Hegelian Right was active. The Left Hegelians, also known as the Young Hegelians, interpreted Hegel in a revolutionary sense, leading to an advocation of atheism in religion and liberal democracy in politics.

In more recent studies, this paradigm has been questioned.[86] No Hegelians of the period ever referred to themselves as "Right Hegelians", which was a term of insult originated by David Strauss, a self-styled Left Hegelian. Critiques of Hegel offered from the Left Hegelians radically diverted Hegel's thinking into new directions and eventually came to form a disproportionately large part of the literature on and about Hegel.[citation needed]

The Left Hegelians also influenced Marxism, which inspired global movements, encompassing the Russian Revolution, the Chinese Revolution and myriad revolutionary practices up until the present moment.[citation needed]

20th-century interpretations of Hegel were mostly shaped by British idealism, logical positivism, Marxism and Fascism. According to Benedetto Croce, the Italian Fascist Giovanni Gentile "holds the honor of having been the most rigorous neo-Hegelian in the entire history of Western philosophy and the dishonor of having been the official philosopher of Fascism in Italy".[87] However, since the fall of the Soviet Union a new wave of Hegel scholarship arose in the West without the preconceptions of the prior schools of thought. Walter Jaeschke [de] and Otto Pöggeler in Germany as well as Peter Hodgson and Howard Kainz in the United States are notable for their recent contributions to post-Soviet Union thinking about Hegel.

Triads
Main article: Thesis, antithesis, synthesis
In previous modern accounts of Hegelianism (to undergraduate classes, for example), especially those formed prior to the Hegel renaissance, Hegel's dialectic was most often characterized as a three-step process, "thesis, antithesis, synthesis"; namely, that a "thesis" (e.g. the French Revolution) would cause the creation of its "antithesis" (e.g. the Reign of Terror that followed) and would eventually result in a "synthesis" (e.g. the constitutional state of free citizens). However, Hegel used this classification only once and he attributed the terminology to Kant. The terminology was largely developed earlier by Fichte. It was spread by Heinrich Moritz Chalybäus in accounts of Hegelian philosophy and since then the terms have been used as descriptive of this type of framework.

The "thesis–antithesis–synthesis" approach gives the sense that things or ideas are contradicted or opposed by things that come from outside them. To the contrary, the fundamental notion of Hegel's dialectic is that things or ideas have internal contradictions. From Hegel's point of view, analysis or comprehension of a thing or idea reveals that underneath its apparently simple identity or unity is an underlying inner contradiction. This contradiction leads to the dissolution of the thing or idea in the simple form in which it presented itself and to a higher-level, more complex thing or idea that more adequately incorporates the contradiction. The triadic form that appears in many places in Hegel (e.g. being–nothingness–becoming, immediate–mediate–concrete and abstract–negative–concrete) is about this movement from inner contradiction to higher-level integration or unification.

For Hegel, reason is but "speculative", not "dialectical".[88] Believing that the traditional description of Hegel's philosophy in terms of thesis–antithesis–synthesis was mistaken, a few scholars like Raya Dunayevskaya have attempted to discard the triadic approach altogether. According to their argument, although Hegel refers to "the two elemental considerations: first, the idea of freedom as the absolute and final aim; secondly, the means for realising it, i.e. the subjective side of knowledge and will, with its life, movement, and activity" (thesis and antithesis), he does not use "synthesis", but instead speaks of the "Whole": "We then recognised the State as the moral Whole and the Reality of Freedom, and consequently as the objective unity of these two elements". Furthermore, in Hegel's language the "dialectical" aspect or "moment" of thought and reality, by which things or thoughts turn into their opposites or have their inner contradictions brought to the surface, what he called Aufhebung, is only preliminary to the "speculative" (and not "synthesizing") aspect or "moment", which grasps the unity of these opposites or contradiction.

It is widely admitted today that the old-fashioned description of Hegel's philosophy in terms of thesis–antithesis–synthesis is inaccurate. Nevertheless, such is the persistence of this misnomer that the model and terminology survive in a number of scholarly works.[89]

Renaissance
In the last half of the 20th century, Hegel's philosophy underwent a major renaissance. This was due to (a) the rediscovery and re-evaluation of Hegel as a possible philosophical progenitor of Marxism by philosophically oriented Marxists; (b) a resurgence of the historical perspective that Hegel brought to everything; and (c) an increasing recognition of the importance of his dialectical method. György Lukács' History and Class Consciousness (1923) helped to reintroduce Hegel into the Marxist canon. This sparked a renewed interest in Hegel reflected in the work of Herbert Marcuse, Theodor W. Adorno, Ernst Bloch, Raya Dunayevskaya, Alexandre Kojève and Gotthard Günther among others. In Reason and Revolution (1941), Herbert Marcuse made the case for Hegel as a revolutionary and criticized Leonard Trelawny Hobhouse's thesis that Hegel was a totalitarian.[90] The Hegel renaissance also highlighted the significance of Hegel's early works, i.e. those written before The Phenomenology of Spirit. The direct and indirect influence of Kojève's lectures and writings (on The Phenomenology of Spirit in particular) mean that it is not possible to understand most French philosophers from Jean-Paul Sartre to Jacques Derrida without understanding Hegel.[91] American neoconservative political theorist Francis Fukuyama's controversial book The End of History and the Last Man (1992) was heavily influenced by Kojève.[92] The Swiss theologian Hans Küng has also advanced contemporary scholarship in Hegel studies.[citation needed]

Beginning in the 1960s, Anglo-American Hegel scholarship has attempted to challenge the traditional interpretation of Hegel as offering a metaphysical system: this has also been the approach of Z. A. Pelczynski and Shlomo Avineri. This view, sometimes referred to as the "non-metaphysical option", has had a decided influence on many major English language studies of Hegel in the past forty years.

Late 20th-century literature in Western Theology that is friendly to Hegel includes works by such writers as Walter Kaufmann (1966), Dale M. Schlitt (1984), Theodore Geraets (1985), Philip M. Merklinger (1991), Stephen Rocker (1995) and Cyril O'Regan (1995).

Two prominent American philosophers, John McDowell and Robert Brandom (sometimes referred to as the "Pittsburgh Hegelians"), have produced philosophical works exhibiting a marked Hegelian influence. Each is avowedly influenced by the late Wilfred Sellars, also of Pittsburgh, who referred to his seminal work Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind (1956) as a series of "incipient Méditations Hegeliennes" (in homage to Edmund Husserl's 1931 work, Méditations cartésiennes).

Beginning in the 1990s after the fall of the Soviet Union, a fresh reading of Hegel took place in the West. For these scholars, fairly well represented by the Hegel Society of America and in cooperation with German scholars such as Otto Pöggeler and Walter Jaeschke, Hegel's works should be read without preconceptions. Marx plays little-to-no role in these new readings. Some American philosophers associated with this movement include Lawrence Stepelevich, Rudolf Siebert, Richard Dien Winfield and Theodore Geraets.[citation needed]

Criticism
Criticism of Hegel has been widespread in the 19th and the 20th centuries. A diverse range of individuals including Arthur Schopenhauer, Karl Marx, Søren Kierkegaard, Friedrich Nietzsche, Bertrand Russell, G. E. Moore, Franz Rosenzweig, Eric Voegelin and A. J. Ayer have challenged Hegelian philosophy from a variety of perspectives. Among the first to take a critical view of Hegel's system was the 19th-century German group known as the Young Hegelians, which included Feuerbach, Marx, Engels and their followers. In Britain, the Hegelian British idealism school (members of which included Francis Herbert Bradley, Bernard Bosanquet and in the United States Josiah Royce) was challenged and rejected by analytic philosophers Moore and Russell. In particular, Russell considered "almost all" of Hegel's doctrines to be false.[93] Regarding Hegel's interpretation of history, Russell commented: "Like other historical theories, it required, if it was to be made plausible, some distortion of facts and considerable ignorance".[94] Logical positivists such as Ayer and the Vienna Circle criticized both Hegelian philosophy and its supporters, such as Bradley.

Hegel's contemporary Schopenhauer was particularly critical and wrote of Hegel's philosophy as "a pseudo-philosophy paralyzing all mental powers, stifling all real thinking".[95] In 1820, Schopenhauer became a lecturer at the University of Berlin and he scheduled his lectures to coincide with those of Hegel, whom Schopenhauer had also described as a "clumsy charlatan".[96] However, only five students ended up attending Schopenhauer's lectures so he dropped out of academia. Kierkegaard criticized Hegel's "absolute knowledge" unity.[97] The physicist and philosopher Ludwig Boltzmann also criticized the obscure complexity of Hegel's works, referring to Hegel's writing as an "unclear thoughtless flow of words".[98] In a similar vein, Robert Pippin notes that some view Hegel as having "the ugliest prose style in the history of the German language".[99] Russell wrote in A History of Western Philosophy (1945) that Hegel was "the hardest to understand of all the great philosophers".[100] Karl Popper quoted Schopenhauer as stating, "Should you ever intend to dull the wits of a young man and to incapacitate his brains for any kind of thought whatever, then you cannot do better than give Hegel to read...A guardian fearing that his ward might become too intelligent for his schemes might prevent this misfortune by innocently suggesting the reading of Hegel."[101]

Karl Popper wrote that "there is so much philosophical writing (especially in the Hegelian school) which may justly be criticised as meaningless verbiage".[102] Popper also makes the claim in the second volume of The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) that Hegel's system formed a thinly veiled justification for the absolute rule of Frederick William III and that Hegel's idea of the ultimate goal of history was to reach a state approximating that of 1830s Prussia. Popper further proposed that Hegel's philosophy served not only as an inspiration for communist and fascist totalitarian governments of the 20th century, whose dialectics allow for any belief to be construed as rational simply if it could be said to exist. Kaufmann and Shlomo Avineri have criticized Popper's theories about Hegel.[103]

Isaiah Berlin listed Hegel as one of the six architects of modern authoritarianism who undermined liberal democracy, along with Rousseau, Claude Adrien Helvétius, Fichte, Saint-Simon and Joseph de Maistre.[104]

Voegelin argued that Hegel should be understood not as a philosopher, but as a "sorcerer", i.e. as a mystic and hermetic thinker.[105] This concept of Hegel as a hermetic thinker was elaborated by Glenn Alexander Magee,[106] who argued that interpreting Hegel's body of work as an expression of mysticism and hermetic ideas leads to a more accurate understanding of Hegel.[107]

Selected works
Main article: Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel bibliography
Published during Hegel's lifetime
Differenz des Fichteschen und Schellingschen Systems der Philosophie, 1801
The Difference Between Fichte's and Schelling's Systems of Philosophy, tr. H. S. Harris and Walter Cerf, 1977
Phänomenologie des Geistes, 1807
Phenomenology of Mind, tr. J. B. Baillie, 1910; 2nd ed. 1931
Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit, tr. A. V. Miller, 1977
Phenomenology of Spirit, translated by Terry Pinkard, 2012
Wissenschaft der Logik, 1812, 1813, 1816, "Doctrine of Being" revised 1831
Science of Logic, tr. W. H. Johnston and L. G. Struthers, 2 vols., 1929; tr. A. V. Miller, 1969; tr. George di Giovanni, 2010
Enzyklopädie der philosophischen Wissenschaften, 1817; 2nd ed. 1827; 3rd ed. 1830 (Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences)
(Pt. I:) The Logic of Hegel, tr. William Wallace, 1874, 2nd ed. 1892; tr. T. F. Geraets, W. A. Suchting and H. S. Harris, 1991; tr. Klaus Brinkmann and Daniel O. Dahlstrom 2010
(Pt. II:) Hegel's Philosophy of Nature, tr. A. V. Miller, 1970
(Pt. III:) Hegel's Philosophy of Mind, tr. William Wallace, 1894; rev. by A. V. Miller, 1971; rev. 2007 by Michael Inwood
Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts, 1821
Elements of the Philosophy of Right, tr. T. M. Knox, 1942; tr. H. B. Nisbet, ed. Allen W. Wood, 1991
Published posthumously
Lectures on Aesthetics
Lectures on the Philosophy of History (also translated as Lectures on the Philosophy of World History), 1837
Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion
Lectures on the History of Philosophy
See also
	Philosophy portal
Dialectical idealism
"God is dead"
Hegel-Archiv
Political consciousness
Process theology
Rudy Rucker, the great-great-great-grandson of Hegel
Notes
 Timothy C. Luther, Hegel's Critique of Modernity: Reconciling Individual Freedom and the Community, Lexington Books, 2009, p. 98.
 Brian K. Etter, Between Transcendence and Historicism, SUNY Press, 2006, p. 68.
 James Kreines, Reason in the World: Hegel's Metaphysics and Its Philosophical Appeal, Oxford University Press, 2015, p. 21.
 A. Sarlemijn, Hegel's Dialectic, Springer, 1975, p. 21.
 Tom Rockmore, Before and After Hegel: A Historical Introduction to Hegel's Thought, Hackett Publishing, 2003, p. xviii: "Hegel follows Kant ... in limiting claims to know to the empirically real. In short, he adopts a view very similar to Kant's empirical realism."
 The Coherence Theory of Truth (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)
 Franz Wiedmann, Hegel: An Illustrated Biography, Pegasus, 1968, p. 23.
 Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy (1998): "Alienation".
 John Grier Hibben, Eric v. d. Luft, Hegel's Shorter Logic: An Introduction and Commentary, Gegensatz Press, 2013, p. 143.
 Equivalently: the universal, the particular, and the individual (Allgemeines, Besonderes, Einzelnes).
 Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel: The Science of Logic, Cambridge University Press, 2010, p. 609. See also: Richard Dien Winfield, Hegel's Science of Logic: A Critical Rethinking in Thirty Lectures, Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2012, p. 265.
 David Gray Carlson, A Commentary to Hegel's Science of Logic, Palgrave Macmillan, 2007, p. 38.
 G. W. F. Hegel, Phänomenologie des Geistes (1807), Vorrede: "Das Wahre ist das Ganze."
 G. W. F. Hegel, Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts (1821), Vorrede: "Was vernünftig ist, das ist Wirklich; und was wirklich ist, das ist vernünftig." ["What is rational is real; And what is real is rational."]
 G. W. F. Hegel, Vorlesungen über de Geschichte der Philosophie, Part 3, Duncker und Humblot, 1844, pp. 502 and 514.
 George Kline, On Hegel, Gegensatz Press, 2015; Rugard Otto Gropp, Zu Fragen der Geschichte der Philosophie und des dialektischen Materialismus, Deutscher Verlag der Wissenschaften, 1958, p. 28.
 Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Wissenschaft der Logik Vol. II, Meiner, 1975 [1932], pp. 466 and 474.
 P. Stekeler-Weithofer (2016), "Hegel's Analytic Pragmatism", University of Leipzig, pp. 122–4.
 Lom, Petr (2001). The Limits of Doubt: The Moral and Political Implications of Skepticism. SUNY Press. pp. 65–66.
 MacGregor, David (2014). Hegel and Marx: After the Fall of Communism. University of Wales Press. p. 69.
 Michael N. Forster, After Herder: Philosophy of Language in the German Tradition, Oxford University Press, 2010, p. 9.
 Henderson, James P.; Davis, John B. (1991). "Adam Smith's Influence on Hegel's Philosophical Writings". Journal of the History of Economic Thought. 13 (2): 184–204. doi:10.1017/S1053837200003564.
 Butler, Judith (1987). Subjects of desire: Hegelian reflections in twentieth-century France. New York: Columbia University Press.
 Kelley, Donald R. (2017). The Descent of Ideas: The History of Intellectual History. Routledge. p. 29.
 Hamburg, G. M. (1992). Boris Chicherin & Early Russian Liberalism: 1828 - 1866. Stanford University Press. p. 186.
 "Hegel". Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
 Wells, John C. (2008), Longman Pronunciation Dictionary (3rd ed.), Longman, ISBN 9781405881180
 "Georg - Französisch-Übersetzung - Langenscheidt Deutsch-Französisch Wörterbuch" (in German and French). Langenscheidt. Retrieved 2018-10-18.
 "Wilhelm - Französisch-Übersetzung - Langenscheidt Deutsch-Französisch Wörterbuch" (in German and French). Langenscheidt. Retrieved 2018-10-18.
 "Friedrich - Französisch-Übersetzung - Langenscheidt Deutsch-Französisch Wörterbuch" (in German and French). Langenscheidt. Retrieved 2018-10-18.
 "Duden | He-gel | Rechtschreibung, Bedeutung, Definition". Duden (in German). Retrieved 2018-10-18. Hegel
 Paul, Redding (13 February 1997). "Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
 This term is actually quite rare in Hegel's writings. It does not occur anywhere in The Science of Logic (though he comes close in a remark on p. 124 of the [2010] di Giovanni translation, GW 21.142). In the Encyclopedia presentation of his logic it can be found only at §45R. Greraets, Suchting and Harris note in the introduction to their translation of this later text that the term is more strongly associated with English movement in that later part of the 19th century (Hackett: 1991, xiii).
 Overwhelmingly due to Alexandre Kojève's influential lectures published as Introduction à la lecture de Hegel (Paris, 1947), selections translated into English by James Nichols as Introduction to the Reading of Hegel (New York, 1969). See, for instance, Aimé Patri, "Dialectique du Maître et de l’Esclave", Le Contrat Social, V, No. a (July–August 196r), 234, cited in Editor's Introduction (vii) on the extent of their influence.
 Robert C. Solomon, In the Spirit of Hegel, Oxford University Press, p. 23.
 "Review of Aenesidemus" ("Rezension des Aenesidemus", Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung [de], February 11–12, 1794). Trans. Daniel Breazeale. In Breazeale, Daniel; Fichte, Johann (1993). Fichte: Early Philosophical Writings. Cornell University Press. p. 63.
 "One of the few things on which the analysts, pragmatists, and existentialists agree with the dialectical theologians is that Hegel is to be repudiated: their attitude toward Kant, Aristotle, Plato, and the other great philosophers is not at all unanimous even within each movement; but opposition to Hegel is part of the platform of all four, and of the Marxists, too." Walter Kaufmann, "The Hegel Myth and Its Method" in From Shakespeare to Existentialism: Studies in Poetry, Religion, and Philosophy, Beacon Press, Boston, 1959 (pp. 88–119).
 "Why did Hegel not become for the Protestant world something similar to what Thomas Aquinas was for Roman Catholicism?" (Karl Barth, Protestant Thought from Rousseau to Ritschl: Being the Translation Of Eleven Chapters of Die Protestantische Theologie im 19. Jahrhundert, 268 Harper, 1959).
 Maurice Merleau-Ponty (trans. Herbert L. and Patricia Allen Dreyfus), Sense and Nonsense, Northwestern University Press, 1964, p. 63.
 Pinkard, Terry (2000). Hegel: A Biography. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-49679-7.
 Pinkard, Hegel: A Biography, p. 3, incorrectly gives the date as September 20, 1781, and describes Hegel as aged eleven. Cf. the index to Pinkard's book and his "Chronology of Hegel's Life", which correctly give the date as 1783 (pp. 773, 745); see also German Wikipedia.
 Karl Rosenkranz, Hegels Leben, Duncker und Humblot, 1844, p. 19.
 Beiser, Frederick C., ed. (1993). The Cambridge Companion to Hegel. Cambridge University Press. p. 419. ISBN 978-1-13982495-8.
 Harris, H.S. (1995). Phenomenology and System. p. 7.
 Good, James Allan (2006). A Search for Unity in Diversity: The "Permanent Hegelian Deposit" in the Philosophy of John Dewey. Lexington Books. p. 4.
 "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-10-08. Retrieved 2013-08-09.
 The Spirit of Christianity and Its Fate"
 Kai Hammermeister, The German Aesthetic Tradition, Cambridge University Press, 2002, p. 76.
 (in Latin) G.W.F. Hegel, Dissertatio philosophica de Orbitis Planetarum.
 G.W.F. Hegel, Philosophical Dissertation on the Orbits of the Planets.
 Edward Craig; Michael Hoskin (August 1992). "Hegel and the Seven Planets". Journal for the History of Astronomy. 23 (3): 208–210. Bibcode:1992JHA....23..208C. doi:10.1177/002182869202300307.
 Note that Weltseele zu Pferde is a shortened paraphrase of Hegel's words in the letter. The letter was not published in Hegel's time, but the expression was attributed to Hegel anecdotally, appearing in print from 1859 (L. Noack, Schelling und die Philosophie der Romantik, 1859, p. 153). It is used without attribution by Meyer Kayserling in his Sephardim (1859:103), and is apparently not recognized as a reference to Hegel by the reviewer in Göttingische gelehrte Anzeigen 2 (1861) p. 770, who notes it disapprovingly, as one of Kayserling's "bad jokes" (schlechte Witze). The phrase become widely associated with Hegel later in the 19th century, e.g. G. Baur in Reden gehalten in der Aula der Universität Leipzig beim Rectoratswechsel am 31. October 1874 (1874), p. 36.
 den Kaiser – diese Weltseele – sah ich durch die Stadt zum Rekognoszieren hinausreiten; es ist in der Tat eine wunderbare Empfindung, ein solches Individuum zu sehen, das hier auf einen Punkt kontentriert, auf einem Pferde sitzend, über die Welt übergreift und sie beherrscht.Hegel, letter of 13 October 1806 to F. I. Niethammer, no. 74 (p. 119) in Briefe von und an Hegel ed. Hoffmeister, vol. 1 (1970), cited after H. Schnädelbach in Wolfgang Welsch, Klaus Vieweg (eds.), Das Interesse des Denkens: Hegel aus heutiger Sicht, Wilhelm Fink Verlag (2003), p. 223; trans. Pinkard (2000:228).
 Pinkard (2000:228f).
 Ludwig Siep, Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit, Cambridge University Press, 2014, p. xxi.
 Norman Davies, Europe: A History, 1996, p. 687.
 par. 378
 See Science of Logic, trans. Miller [Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities, 1989]
 Jon Mills, The Unconscious Abyss: Hegel's Anticipation of Psychoanalysis, SUNY Press, 2002, p. 16.
 Steven Schroeder (2000). Between Freedom and Necessity: An Essay on the Place of Value. Rodopi. p. 104. ISBN 978-90-420-1302-5. Retrieved 2012-12-17.
 Stefan Gruner: "Hegel's Aether Doctrine", VDM Publ., 2010, ISBN 978-3-639-28451-5
 Hegel, G. W. F. "Hegel's Philosophy of Right: Preface". www.marxists.org.
 Pelczynski, A.Z.; 1984; 'The Significance of Hegel's separation of the state and civil society' pp1-13 in Pelczynski, A.Z. (ed.); 1984; The State and Civil Society; Cambridge University Press
 Zaleski, Pawel (2008). "Tocqueville on Civilian Society. A Romantic Vision of the Dichotomic Structure of Social Reality". Archiv für Begriffsgeschichte. 50.
 Hegel, G. W. F. (1979). "Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der Philosophie". pp. 336–337. Retrieved 2008-07-01.
 Hartnack, Justus (1998). An Introduction to Hegel's Logic. Lars Aagaard-Mogensen (trans.). Hackett Publishing. pp. 16–17. ISBN 978-0-87220-424-9. Hartnack quotes Hegel, Lectures on the History of Philosophy, Volume I.
 Hegel, G. W. F. (1979). "Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der Philosophie". pp. 319–343. Retrieved 2008-07-01.
 Copleston, Frederick Charles (2003). A History of Philosophy: Volume 7: 18th and 19th century German philosophy. Continuum International Publishing Group. Chapter X. ISBN 978-0-8264-6901-4.
 The notable Introduction to Philosophy of History expresses the historical aspects of the dialectic.
 "[T]he task that touches the interest of philosophy most nearly at the present moment: to put God back at the peak of philosophy, absolutely prior to all else as the one and only ground of everything." (Hegel, "How the Ordinary Human Understanding Takes Philosophy as displayed in the works of Mr. Krug", Kritisches Journal der Philosophie, I, no. 1, 1802, pages 91–115)
 Jon Bartley Stewart. 2008. Johan Ludvig Heiberg: Philosopher, Littérateur, Dramaturge, and Political Thinker. Museum Tusculanum Press. p. 100
 Walter Kaufmann, Hegel: Reinterpretation, Texts, and Commentary, Garden City, New York: Doubleday & Company, 1965, pp. 276–77
 Walter Kaufmann, Hegel: Reinterpretation, Texts, and Commentary, Garden City, New York: Doubleday & Company, 1965, p. 277
 Jon Bartley Stewart. 2008. Johan Ludvig Heiberg: Philosopher, Littérateur, Dramaturge, and Political Thinker. Museum Tusculanum Press. p. 100
 "MDZ-Reader - Band - Von den Beweisen für die Unsterblichkeit der menschlichen Seele im Lichte der spekulativen Philosophie / Göschel, Carl Friedrich". reader.digitale-sammlungen.de.
 In the 1870s and 1880s, Rev. T. R. Vickroy and Susan E. Blow - who were both minor associates of the St. Louis Hegelians - independently of each other translated various chapters from Göschel's book into English, and had their translations published in The Journal of Speculative Philosophy. The Journal of Speculative Philosophy (in print from 1867-1893) was the official journal of the St. Louis Philosophical Society. The St. Louis Philosophical Society - the organization which served as the hub of the St. Louis Hegelians - had been co-founded in January 1866 by 2 disciples of Hegel in America, William Torrey Harris (1835-1909) and Henry Conrad Brokmeyer (1826-1906). Rev. Thomas Rhys Vickroy (December 27, 1833 - April 19, 1904), a minister of the Methodist Episcopal Church, had been the first president (1866-1871) of Lebanon Valley College in Annville, Lebanon County, Pennsylvania. While President at Lebanon Valley College, Vickroy also held various professorships there. For example, one year he was Professor of Philosophy and the Greek Language and Literature, and another year he was Professor of Belles-Lettres and Philosophy. Susan Elizabeth Blow (June 7, 1843 - March 27, 1916) was an educator who in 1873 opened the first successful public kindergarten in the U. S. - in the Des Peres School, in the Carondelet neighborhood of St. Louis, Missouri.
 Jon Bartley Stewart. 2008. Johan Ludvig Heiberg: Philosopher, Littérateur, Dramaturge, and Political Thinker. Museum Tusculanum Press. p. 105
 Josephson-Storm, Jason (2017). The Myth of Disenchantment: Magic, Modernity, and the Birth of the Human Sciences. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp. 85–6. ISBN 978-0-226-40336-6.
 Josephson-Storm (2017), p. 85-6.
 W. Kaufmann (1980), Discovery of the Mind 1: Goethe, Kant and Hegel, p. 203
 Hegel 1996.
 Cormier, Youri. "Hegel and Clausewitz: Convergence on Method, Divergence on Ethics", International History Review, Volume 36, Issue 3, 2014.
 Hegel, G.W.F. Science of Logic. trans. George di Giovanni. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 2010. p.12
 W. Kaufmann (1966), Hegel: A Reinterpretation, Anchor, p. 115
 W. Kaufmann, 1966, Hegel: A Reinterpretation, p. 99
 Karl Löwith, From Hegel to Nietzsche: The Revolution in Nineteenth-Century Thought, translated by David E. Green, New York: Columbia University Press, 1964.
 Benedetto Croce, Guide to Aesthetics, Translated by Patrick Romanell, "Translator's Introduction", The Library of Liberal Arts, The Bobbs–Merrill Co., Inc., 1965
 Hegel and Language, edited by Jere O'Neill Surber. p. 238.
 Gustav E. Mueller (1996). Jon Stewart, ed. The Hegel Myths and Legends. Northwestern University Press. p. 301. ISBN 978-0-8101-1301-5.
 Robinson, Paul (1990). The Freudian Left: Wilhelm Reich, Geza Roheim, Herbert Marcuse. Cornell University Press. p. 156. ISBN 978-0-87220-424-9.
 French philosopher Vincent Descombes introduced the term "post-Kojèvian discourse" to designate the period of French philosophy after the 1930s (Vincent Descombes, Modern French Philosophy, Cambridge University Press, 1980, pp. 158–9).
 Williams, Howard; David Sullivan; Gwynn Matthews (1997). Francis Fukuyama and the End of History. University of Wales Press. pp. 70–71. ISBN 978-0-7083-1428-9.
 B. Russell, History of Western Philosophy, chapter 22, paragraph 1, p. 701.
 Russell, 735.
 On the Basis of Morality.
 Schopenhauer, Arthur. Author's preface to "On The Fourfold Root of the Principle of sufficient reason. Page 1. On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason
 Søren Kierkegaard Concluding Unscientific Postscriptt
 Ludwig Boltzmann, Theoretical physics and philosophical problems: Selected writings, p. 155, D. Reidel, 1974, ISBN 90-277-0250-0
 Robert B. Pippin, Hegel's Idealism: The Satisfaction of Self-Consciousness (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), 5
 Russell, Bertrand (1972). A History of Western Philosophy. p. 730.
 Popper, Karl. The Open Society And Its Enemies. Routledge. p. 287. ISBN 9784624010522.
 Karl Popper, Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientific Knowledge (New York: Routledge, 1963), 94.
 See for instance Walter Kaufmann (1959), The Hegel Myth and Its Method
 Berlin, Isaiah, Freedom and Betrayal: Six Enemies of Human Liberty (Princeton University Press, 2003)
 Voegelin, Eric (1972). "On Hegel—A Study in Sorcery", in J. T. Fraser, F. Haber & G. Muller (eds.), The Study of Time. Springer-Verlag. 418--451 (1972)
 Magee, Glenn Alexander (2001), Hegel and the Hermetic Tradition, Ithaca: Cornell University Press
 "I do not argue that merely that we can understand Hegel as a Hermetic thinker, just as we can understand him as a German or a Swabian or an idealist thinker. Instead, I argue that we must understand Hegel as a Hermetic thinker, if we are to truly understand him at all." Magee 2001, p. 2.
Further reading
The secondary literature on Hegel is vast. The following references provide only a small selection of introductory English-language texts. For a more complete listing, see the external links section or the library resources box to the right.

Beiser, Frederick C. (ed.), 1993. The Cambridge Companion to Hegel. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-38711-6.
Beiser, Frederick C., 2005. Hegel. New York: Routledge.
Burbidge, John, 2006. The Logic of Hegel's Logic: An Introduction. Broadview Press. ISBN 1-55111-633-2
Findlay, J. N., 1958. Hegel: A Re-examination. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-519879-4
Francke, Kuno, Howard, William Guild, Schiller, Friedrich, 1913–1914 The German classics of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries: masterpieces of German literature translated into English Vol 7, Jay Lowenberg, The Life of Georg Wilhelm Freidrich Hegel. New York : German Publication Society. Retrieved 2010-09-24.
Harris, H. S., 1995. Hegel: Phenomenology and System. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Houlgate, Stephen, 2005. An Introduction to Hegel. Freedom, Truth and History. Oxford: Blackwell
Houlgate, Stephen, 2005. The Opening of Hegel's Logic: From Being to Infinity. Purdue University Press. ISBN 1-55753-257-5
Hyppolite, Jean, 1946. Genèse et structure de la Phénoménologie de l'esprit. Paris: Aubier. Eng. tr. Samuel Cherniak and John Heckman as Genesis and Structure of Hegel's "Phenomenology of Spirit", Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1979. ISBN 0-8101-0594-2.
Inwood, Michael, 1983. Hegel. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul (Arguments of the Philosophers)
Kainz, Howard P., 1996. G. W. F. Hegel. Athens: Ohio University Press. ISBN 0-8214-1231-0.
Kaufmann, Walter, 1965. Hegel: A Reinterpretation. New York: Doubleday (reissued Notre Dame IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1978).
Kojève, Alexandre, 1947. Introduction à la lecture de Hegel. Paris: Gallimard. Eng. tr. James H. Nichols, Jr., as Introduction to the Reading of Hegel: Lectures on the Phenomenology of Spirit, Basic Books, 1969. ISBN 0-8014-9203-3.
Losurdo, Domenico, 2004. Hegel and the Freedom of Moderns. Duke University Press Books
Lukács, Georg, 1948. Der junge Hegel. Zürich and Vienna (2nd ed. Berlin, 1954). Eng. tr. Rodney Livingstone as The Young Hegel, London: Merlin Press, 1975. ISBN 0-262-12070-4.
Maker, William, 1994. Philosophy Without Foundations: Rethinking Hegel. State University of New York Press. ISBN 0-7914-2100-7.
Marcuse, Herbert, 1941. Reason and Revolution: Hegel and the Rise of Social Theory.
Mueller, Gustav Emil, 1968. Hegel: the man, his vision, and work. New York: Pageant Press.
Pinkard, Terry, 1988. Hegel's Dialectic: The Explanation of Possibility. Temple University Press
Pinkard, Terry, 1994. Hegel's Phenomenology: The Sociality of Reason. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.
Pippin, Robert B., 1989. Hegel's Idealism: the Satisfactions of Self-Consciousness. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-37923-7.
Plant, Raymond, 1983. Hegel: An Introduction. Oxford: Blackwell
Riedel, Manfred, 1984. Between Tradition and Revolution: The Hegelian Transformation of Political Philosophy, Cambridge.
Rose, Gillian, 1981. Hegel Contra Sociology. Athlone Press.
Rosen, Stanley, 2000. G.W.F Hegel: Introduction To Science Of Wisdom, (Carthage Reprint) St. Augustines Press; 1 edition ISBN 978-1-890318-48-2
Russon, John, 2004. Reading Hegel's Phenomenology. Indiana University Press. ISBN 0-253-21692-3.
Rutter, Benjamin (2010), Hegel on the Modern Arts, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Singer, Peter, 2001. Hegel: A Very Short Introduction. New York: Oxford University Press (previously issued in the OUP Past Masters series, 1983)
Solomon, Robert, 1983. In the Spirit of Hegel, Oxford: Oxford University Press
Stern, Robert (2013). The Routledge guide book to Hegel's Phenomenology of spirit (second ed.). Abingdon, Oxon New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-66445-5.
Stewart, Jon, ed., 1996. The Hegel Myths and Legends. Northwestern University Press.
Stirling, James Hutchison, The Secret of Hegel: Being the Hegelian System in Origin Principle, Form and Matter, London: Oliver & Boyd
Stace, W. T., 1955. The Philosophy of Hegel. New York: Dover.
Taylor, Charles, 1975. Hegel. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-29199-2.
Williams, Robert R., 2000. Hegel's Ethics of Recognition, University of California Press; New Ed edition ISBN 978-0-520-22492-6
Wood, Allen W., 1990 Hegel's Ethical Thought, Cambridge University Press ISBN 978-0-521-37782-9
External links
	Wikiquote has quotations related to: Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel.
	Wikisource has original works written by or about:
Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
Andrew Chitty's (University of Sussex) Hegel Bibliography
Redding, Paul. "Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel". In Zalta, Edward N. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Houlgate, Stephen. "Hegel's Aesthetics". In Zalta, Edward N. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
« Der Instinkt der Vernünftigkeit » and other texts - Works on Hegel in Université du Québec site (in French)
Hegel, as the National Philosopher of Germany (1874) Karl Rosenkranz, Granville Stanley Hall, William Torrey Harris, Gray, Baker & Co. 1874
Hegel page in 'The History Guide'
Hegel.net – freely available resources (under the GNU FDL)
Lowenberg J., (1913) "The Life of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel". in German classics of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. New York: German Publication Society.
Audio
Works by Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Video
Hegel: The First Cultural Psychologist 2007 from Vimeo Andy Blunden
Presentation by Terry Pinkard on Hegel: A Biography, May 10, 2000
Societies
The Hegel Society of America
The Hegel Society of Great Britain
Hegel texts online
Works by Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel at Internet Archive
Philosophy of History Introduction
Hegel's The Philosophy of Right
Hegel's The Philosophy of History
Hegel by HyperText, reference archive on Marxists.org
Phenomenology of Spirit. translated by Terry Pinkard (2012)
Articles related to Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
Authority control Edit this at Wikidata	
BIBSYS: 90069382 BNE: XX840648 BNF: cb11907123g (data) GND: 118547739 HDS: 47710 ISNI: 0000 0001 2282 8149 LCCN: n79021767 MusicBrainz: 1923602f-e93c-47fc-a342-fb1ca10250f5 MGP: 107498 NDL: 00442872 NKC: jn19990003303 NLA: 35184267 RKD: 444620 RSL: 000085036 ICCU: IT\ICCU\CFIV\015048 SELIBR: 190350 SNAC: w6dj5m46 SUDOC: 026917467 ULAN: 500221954 VIAF: 89774942 WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 89774942
Categories: Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel1770 births1831 deaths18th-century German philosophers18th-century German writers18th-century philosophers19th-century German philosophers19th-century German writers19th-century philosophersContinental philosophersDeath of God theologiansDeaths from choleraGerman ethicistsGerman historians of philosophyGerman idealismGerman logiciansGerman LutheransGerman philosophersGerman political theoristsHegelian philosophersHeidelberg University alumniHumboldt University of Berlin facultyIdealistsInfectious disease deaths in GermanyMetaphysiciansMoral philosophersMysticsOntologistsPeople from StuttgartPeople from the Duchy of WürttembergPhilosophers of artPhilosophers of educationPhilosophers of ethics and moralityPhilosophers of historyPhilosophers of lawPhilosophers of logicPhilosophers of mindPolitical philosophersRomanticismSocial philosophersSpinoza scholarsSpinozist philosophersNeo-SpinozismTheories of history
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote
Wikisource

Languages
Беларуская
Deutsch
हिन्दी
Lietuvių
Polski
Русский
Українська
اردو
中文
105 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 14 March 2019, at 19:58 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Friedrich Nietzsche
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
  (Redirected from Nietzsche)
Jump to navigationJump to search
"Nietzsche" redirects here. For other uses, see Nietzsche (disambiguation).
Friedrich Nietzsche
Nietzsche187a.jpg
Nietzsche in Basel, c. 1875
Born	Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche
15 October 1844
Röcken, Province of Saxony, Kingdom of Prussia, German Confederation
Died	25 August 1900 (aged 55)
Weimar, Grand Duchy of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach, German Empire
Nationality	German
Alma mater	
University of Bonn
Leipzig University
Era	19th-century philosophy
Region	Western philosophy
School	
Anti-foundationalism
Anti-consumerism
Atheism
Continental philosophy
German idealism[1]
Existentialism
Nihilism
Perspectivism
Voluntarism
Institutions	University of Basel
Main interests
Aesthetics
Ethics
Metaphysics
Ontology
Philosophy of history
Poetry
Psychology
Tragedy
Value theory
Notable ideas
Amor fati
Apollonian and Dionysian
Eternal return
Fact–value distinction
Genealogy
God is dead
Herd instinct
Last man
Master–slave morality
Nietzschean affirmation
Perspectivism
Ressentiment
Transvaluation of values
Tschandala
Übermensch
Will to power
Influences[show]
Influenced[show]
Signature
Friedrich Nietzsche Signature.svg
Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche (/ˈniːtʃə, ˈniːtʃi/,[6][7] German: [ˈfʁiːdʁɪç ˈvɪlhɛlm ˈniːtʃə] (About this soundlisten) or [- ˈniːtsʃə];[8][9][10] 15 October 1844 – 25 August 1900) was a German philosopher, cultural critic, composer, poet, philologist, and Latin and Greek scholar whose work has exerted a profound influence on Western philosophy and modern intellectual history.[11][12][13][14][15] He began his career as a classical philologist before turning to philosophy. He became the youngest ever to hold the Chair of Classical Philology at the University of Basel in 1869 at the age of 24.[16] Nietzsche resigned in 1879 due to health problems that plagued him most of his life; he completed much of his core writing in the following decade.[17] In 1889 at age 44, he suffered a collapse and afterward, a complete loss of his mental faculties.[18] He lived his remaining years in the care of his mother until her death in 1897 and then with his sister Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche. Nietzsche died in 1900.[19]

Nietzsche's body of work touched a wide range of topics, including art, philology, history, religion, tragedy, culture, and science. His writing spans philosophical polemics, poetry, cultural criticism and fiction while displaying a fondness for aphorism and irony.[20] His early inspiration was drawn from figures such as Arthur Schopenhauer,[2] Richard Wagner[2] and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe.[2] Prominent elements of his philosophy include his radical critique of truth in favor of perspectivism; his genealogical critique of religion and Christian morality and his related theory of master–slave morality;[12][21] his aesthetic affirmation of existence in response to the "death of God" and the profound crisis of nihilism;[12] his notion of the Apollonian and Dionysian; and his characterization of the human subject as the expression of competing wills, collectively understood as the will to power.[22] He also developed influential concepts such as the Übermensch and the doctrine of eternal return.[23][24] In his later work, he became increasingly preoccupied with the creative powers of the individual to overcome social, cultural and moral contexts in pursuit of new values and aesthetic health.[15]

After his death, his sister Elisabeth became the curator and editor of Nietzsche's manuscripts, reworking his unpublished writings to fit her own German nationalist ideology while often contradicting or obfuscating Nietzsche's stated opinions, which were explicitly opposed to antisemitism and nationalism. Through her published editions, Nietzsche's work became associated with fascism and Nazism;[25] 20th century scholars contested this interpretation of his work and corrected editions of his writings were soon made available. Nietzsche's thought enjoyed renewed popularity in the 1960s and his ideas have since had a profound impact on 20th and early-21st century thinkers across philosophy—especially in schools of continental philosophy such as existentialism, postmodernism and post-structuralism—as well as art, literature, psychology, politics and popular culture.[13][14][15][26][27]


Contents
1	Life
1.1	Youth (1844–1868)
1.2	Professor at Basel (1869–1878)
1.3	Independent philosopher (1879–1888)
1.4	Psychological illness and death (1889–1900)
1.5	Citizenship, nationality and ethnicity
1.6	Relationships and sexuality
2	Philosophy
2.1	Apollonian and Dionysian
2.2	Perspectivism
2.3	The "slave revolt" in morals
2.4	Death of God and nihilism
2.5	Will to power
2.6	Eternal return
2.7	Übermensch
2.8	Critique of mass culture
3	Reading and influence
4	Reception and legacy
5	Works
6	See also
7	References
7.1	Works cited
8	Further reading
9	External links
Life
Youth (1844–1868)
Born on 15 October 1844, Nietzsche grew up in the small town of Röcken, near Leipzig, in the Prussian Province of Saxony. He was named after King Friedrich Wilhelm IV of Prussia, who turned 49 on the day of Nietzsche's birth (Nietzsche later dropped his middle name Wilhelm).[28] Nietzsche's parents, Carl Ludwig Nietzsche (1813–1849), a Lutheran pastor and former teacher; and Franziska Nietzsche [de] (née Oehler) (1826–1897), married in 1843, the year before their son's birth. They had two other children: a daughter, Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche, born in 1846; and a second son, Ludwig Joseph, born in 1848. Nietzsche's father died from a brain ailment in 1849; Ludwig Joseph died six months later at age two.[29] The family then moved to Naumburg, where they lived with Nietzsche's maternal grandmother and his father's two unmarried sisters. After the death of Nietzsche's grandmother in 1856, the family moved into their own house, now Nietzsche-Haus, a museum and Nietzsche study centre.


Nietzsche, 1861
Nietzsche attended a boys' school and then a private school, where he became friends with Gustav Krug, Rudolf Wagner and Wilhelm Pinder, all of whom came from highly respected families[clarification needed].

In 1854, he began to attend Domgymnasium in Naumburg. Because his father had worked for the state (as a pastor) the now-fatherless Nietzsche was offered a scholarship to study at the internationally recognized Schulpforta (the claim that Nietzsche was admitted on the strength of his academic competence has been debunked: his grades were nowhere near the top of the class).[30] He transferred and studied there from 1858 to 1864, becoming friends with Paul Deussen and Carl von Gersdorff. He also found time to work on poems and musical compositions. Nietzsche led "Germania", a music and literature club, during his summers in Naumburg.[29] At Schulpforta, Nietzsche received an important grounding in languages—Greek, Latin, Hebrew, and French—so as to be able to read important primary sources;[31] he also experienced for the first time being away from his family life in a small-town conservative environment. His end-of-semester exams in March 1864 showed a 1 in Religion and German; a 2a in Greek and Latin; a 2b in French, History, and Physics; and a "lackluster" 3 in Hebrew and Mathematics.[32]

While at Pforta, Nietzsche had a penchant for pursuing subjects that were considered unbecoming. He became acquainted with the work of the then almost-unknown poet Friedrich Hölderlin, calling him "my favorite poet" and composing an essay in which he said that the mad poet raised consciousness to "the most sublime ideality."[33] The teacher who corrected the essay gave it a good mark but commented that Nietzsche should concern himself in the future with healthier, more lucid, and more "German" writers. Additionally, he became acquainted with Ernst Ortlepp, an eccentric, blasphemous, and often drunken poet who was found dead in a ditch weeks after meeting the young Nietzsche but who may have introduced Nietzsche to the music and writing of Richard Wagner.[34] Perhaps under Ortlepp's influence, he and a student named Richter returned to school drunk and encountered a teacher, resulting in Nietzsche's demotion from first in his class and the end of his status as a prefect.[35]


Young Nietzsche
After graduation in September 1864,[36] Nietzsche commenced studies in theology and classical philology at the University of Bonn with hope of becoming a minister. For a short time he and Deussen became members of the Burschenschaft Frankonia. After one semester (and to the anger of his mother), he stopped his theological studies and lost his faith.[37] As early as his 1862 essay "Fate and History", Nietzsche had argued that historical research had discredited the central teachings of Christianity,[38] but David Strauss's Life of Jesus also seems to have had a profound effect on the young man.[37] In addition, Ludwig Feuerbach's The Essence of Christianity influenced young Nietzsche with its argument that people created God, and not the other way around.[39] In June 1865, at the age of 20, Nietzsche wrote to his sister Elisabeth, who was deeply religious, a letter regarding his loss of faith. This letter contains the following statement:

Hence the ways of men part: if you wish to strive for peace of soul and pleasure, then believe; if you wish to be a devotee of truth, then inquire...[40]


Arthur Schopenhauer strongly influenced Nietzsche's philosophical thought
Nietzsche subsequently concentrated on studying philology under Professor Friedrich Wilhelm Ritschl, whom he followed to the University of Leipzig in 1865.[18] There, he became close friends with his fellow student Erwin Rohde. Nietzsche's first philological publications appeared soon after.

In 1865, Nietzsche thoroughly studied the works of Arthur Schopenhauer. He owed the awakening of his philosophical interest to reading Schopenhauer's The World as Will and Representation and later admitted that Schopenhauer was one of the few thinkers whom he respected, dedicating the essay "Schopenhauer as Educator" in the Untimely Meditations to him.

In 1866, he read Friedrich Albert Lange's History of Materialism. Lange's descriptions of Kant's anti-materialistic philosophy, the rise of European Materialism, Europe's increased concern with science, Charles Darwin's theory of evolution, and the general rebellion against tradition and authority intrigued Nietzsche greatly. Nietzsche would ultimately argue the impossibility of an evolutionary explanation of the human aesthetic sense.[41]

In 1867, Nietzsche signed up for one year of voluntary service with the Prussian artillery division in Naumburg. He was regarded as one of the finest riders among his fellow recruits, and his officers predicted that he would soon reach the rank of captain. However, in March 1868, while jumping into the saddle of his horse, Nietzsche struck his chest against the pommel and tore two muscles in his left side, leaving him exhausted and unable to walk for months.[42][43] Consequently, Nietzsche turned his attention to his studies again, completing them in 1868 and meeting with Richard Wagner for the first time later that year.[44]

Professor at Basel (1869–1878)


From left to right: Erwin Rohde, Karl von Gersdorff and Nietzsche, October 1871
In part because of Ritschl's support, Nietzsche received a remarkable offer in 1869 to become professor of classical philology at the University of Basel in Switzerland. He was only 24 years old and had neither completed his doctorate nor received a teaching certificate ("habilitation"). He was awarded an honorary doctorate by the University of Leipzig, again with Ritschl's support.[45]

Despite the fact that the offer came at a time when he was considering giving up philology for science, he accepted.[46] To this day, Nietzsche is still among the youngest of the tenured Classics professors on record.[47]

Nietzsche's 1870 projected doctoral thesis, Contribution toward the Study and the Critique of the Sources of Diogenes Laertius (Beiträge zur Quellenkunde und Kritik des Laertius Diogenes), examined the origins of the ideas of Diogenes Laërtius.[48] Though never submitted, it was later published as a Gratulationsschrift (congratulatory publication) at Basel.[49][50]

Before moving to Basel, Nietzsche renounced his Prussian citizenship: for the rest of his life he remained officially stateless.[51][52]

Nevertheless, Nietzsche served in the Prussian forces during the Franco-Prussian War (1870–1871) as a medical orderly. In his short time in the military, he experienced much and witnessed the traumatic effects of battle. He also contracted diphtheria and dysentery.[citation needed] Walter Kaufmann speculates that he might also have contracted syphilis at a brothel along with his other infections at this time.[53][54] On returning to Basel in 1870, Nietzsche observed the establishment of the German Empire and Otto von Bismarck's subsequent policies as an outsider and with a degree of skepticism regarding their genuineness. His inaugural lecture at the university was "Homer and Classical Philology". Nietzsche also met Franz Overbeck, a professor of theology who remained his friend throughout his life. Afrikan Spir, a little-known Russian philosopher responsible for the 1873 Thought and Reality, and Nietzsche's colleague the famed historian Jacob Burckhardt, whose lectures Nietzsche frequently attended, began to exercise significant influence on him during this time.[55]

Nietzsche had already met Richard Wagner in Leipzig in 1868 and later Wagner's wife, Cosima. Nietzsche admired both greatly and during his time at Basel frequently visited Wagner's house in Tribschen in Lucerne. The Wagners brought Nietzsche into their most intimate circle—including Franz Liszt, of whom Nietzsche colloquially described: "Liszt or the art of running after women!".[56] Nietzsche enjoyed the attention he gave to the beginning of the Bayreuth Festival. In 1870, he gave Cosima Wagner the manuscript of "The Genesis of the Tragic Idea" as a birthday gift. In 1872, Nietzsche published his first book, The Birth of Tragedy. However, his colleagues within his field, including Ritschl, expressed little enthusiasm for the work in which Nietzsche eschewed the classical philologic method in favor of a more speculative approach. In his polemic Philology of the Future, Ulrich von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff dampened the book's reception and increased its notoriety. In response, Rohde (then a professor in Kiel) and Wagner came to Nietzsche's defense. Nietzsche remarked freely about the isolation he felt within the philological community and attempted unsuccessfully to transfer to a position in philosophy at Basel instead.


Nietzsche, c. 1872
In 1873, Nietzsche began to accumulate notes that would be posthumously published as Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks. Between 1873 and 1876, he published four separate long essays: "David Strauss: the Confessor and the Writer", "On the Use and Abuse of History for Life", "Schopenhauer as Educator" and "Richard Wagner in Bayreuth". These four later appeared in a collected edition under the title Untimely Meditations. The essays shared the orientation of a cultural critique, challenging the developing German culture along lines suggested by Schopenhauer and Wagner. During this time in the circle of the Wagners, he met Malwida von Meysenbug and Hans von Bülow. He also began a friendship with Paul Rée, who in 1876 influenced him into dismissing the pessimism in his early writings. However, he was deeply disappointed by the Bayreuth Festival of 1876, where the banality of the shows and baseness of the public repelled him. He was also alienated by Wagner's championing of "German culture", which Nietzsche felt a contradiction in terms as well as by Wagner's celebration of his fame among the German public. All this contributed to his subsequent decision to distance himself from Wagner.

With the publication in 1878 of Human, All Too Human (a book of aphorisms ranging from metaphysics to morality to religion to gender studies), a new style of Nietzsche's work became clear, highly influenced by Afrikan Spir's Thought and Reality[57] and reacting against the pessimistic philosophy of Wagner and Schopenhauer. Nietzsche's friendship with Deussen and Rohde cooled as well. In 1879, after a significant decline in health, Nietzsche had to resign his position at Basel. Since his childhood, various disruptive illnesses had plagued him, including moments of shortsightedness that left him nearly blind, migraine headaches, and violent indigestion. The 1868 riding accident and diseases in 1870 may have aggravated these persistent conditions, which continued to affect him through his years at Basel, forcing him to take longer and longer holidays until regular work became impractical.

Independent philosopher (1879–1888)


Lou Salomé, Paul Rée and Nietzsche in 1882 as the three traveled through Italy, planning to establish an educational commune together, but the friendship disintegrated in late 1882 due to complications from Rée and Nietzsche's mutual romantic interest in Salomé
Living off his pension from Basel and aid from friends, Nietzsche travelled frequently to find climates more conducive to his health and lived until 1889 as an independent author in different cities. He spent many summers in Sils Maria near St. Moritz in Switzerland. He spent his winters in the Italian cities of Genoa, Rapallo, and Turin and the French city of Nice. In 1881, when France occupied Tunisia, he planned to travel to Tunis to view Europe from the outside but later abandoned that idea, probably for health reasons.[58] Nietzsche occasionally returned to Naumburg to visit his family, and, especially during this time, he and his sister had repeated periods of conflict and reconciliation.

While in Genoa, Nietzsche's failing eyesight prompted him to explore the use of typewriters as a means of continuing to write. He is known to have tried using the Hansen Writing Ball, a contemporary typewriter device. In the end, a past student of his, Heinrich Köselitz or Peter Gast, became a sort of private secretary to Nietzsche. In 1876, Gast transcribed the crabbed, nearly illegible handwriting of Nietzsche for the first time with Richard Wagner in Bayreuth.[59] He subsequently transcribed and proofread the galleys for almost all of Nietzsche's work from then on. On at least one occasion on 23 February 1880, the usually poor Gast received 200 marks from their mutual friend, Paul Rée.[60] Gast was one of the very few friends Nietzsche allowed to criticize him. In responding most enthusiastically to Thus Spoke Zarathustra, Gast did feel it necessary to point out that what were described as "superfluous" people were in fact quite necessary. He went on to list the number of people Epicurus, for example, had to rely on even to supply his simple diet of goat cheese.[61]

To the end of his life, Gast and Overbeck remained consistently faithful friends. Malwida von Meysenbug remained like a motherly patron even outside the Wagner circle. Soon Nietzsche made contact with the music-critic Carl Fuchs. Nietzsche stood at the beginning of his most productive period. Beginning with Human, All Too Human in 1878, Nietzsche published one book or major section of a book each year until 1888, his last year of writing; that year, he completed five.

In 1882, Nietzsche published the first part of The Gay Science. That year he also met Lou Andreas-Salomé,[62] through Malwida von Meysenbug and Paul Rée.

Salomé's mother took her to Rome when Salomé was 21. At a literary salon in the city, Salomé became acquainted with Paul Rée. Rée proposed marriage to her, but she instead proposed that they should live and study together as 'brother and sister', along with another man for company, where they would establish an academic commune.[63] Rée accepted the idea, and suggested that they be joined by his friend Nietzsche. The two met Nietzsche in Rome in April 1882, and Nietzsche is believed to have instantly fallen in love with Salome, as Rée had done. Nietzsche asked Rée to propose marriage to Salome, which she rejected. She had been interested in Nietzsche as a friend, but not as a husband.[63] Nietzsche nonetheless was content to join together with Rée and Salome touring through Switzerland and Italy together, planning their commune. The three traveled with Salomé's mother through Italy and considered where they would set up their "Winterplan" commune. This commune was intended to be set up in an abandoned monastery, but no suitable location was found. On 13 May, in Lucerne, when Nietzsche was alone with Salome, he earnestly proposed marriage to her again, which she rejected. He nonetheless was happy to continue with the plans for an academic commune.[63] After discovering the situation, Nietzsche's sister Elizabeth became determined to get Nietzsche away from the "immoral woman".[64] Nietzsche and Salomé spent the summer together in Tautenburg in Thuringia, often with Nietzsche's sister Elisabeth as a chaperone. Salomé reports that he asked her to marry him on three separate occasions and that she refused, though the reliability of her reports of events has come into question.[65] Arriving in Leipzig, (Germany) in October, Salomé and Rée separated from Nietzsche after a falling-out between Nietzsche and Salomé, in which Salomé believed that Nietzsche was desperately in love with her.

While the three spent a number of weeks together in Leipzig in October 1882, the following month Rée and Salome ditched Nietzsche, leaving for Stibbe without any plans to meet again. Nietzsche soon fell into a period of mental anguish, although he continued to write to Rée, stating "We shall see one another from time to time, won't we?"[66] In later recriminations, Nietzsche would blame on separate occasions the failure in his attempts to woo Salome both on Salome, Rée, and on the intrigues of his sister (who had written letters to the family of Salome and Rée to disrupt the plans for the commune). Nietzsche wrote of the affair in 1883, that he now felt "genuine hatred for my sister."[66]

Amidst renewed bouts of illness, living in near-isolation after a falling out with his mother and sister regarding Salomé, Nietzsche fled to Rapallo, where he wrote the first part of Thus Spoke Zarathustra in only ten days.


Photo of Nietzsche by Gustav Adolf Schultze [de], 1882
By 1882, Nietzsche was taking huge doses of opium, but he was still having trouble sleeping.[67] In 1883, while staying in Nice, he was writing out his own prescriptions for the sedative chloral hydrate, signing them "Dr. Nietzsche".[68]

After severing his philosophical ties with Schopenhauer (who was long dead and never met Nietzsche) and his social ties with Wagner, Nietzsche had few remaining friends. Now, with the new style of Zarathustra, his work became even more alienating, and the market received it only to the degree required by politeness. Nietzsche recognized this and maintained his solitude, though he often complained about it. His books remained largely unsold. In 1885, he printed only 40 copies of the fourth part of Zarathustra and distributed only a fraction of these among close friends, including Helene von Druskowitz.

In 1883, he tried and failed to obtain a lecturing post at the University of Leipzig. It was made clear to him that, in view of his attitude towards Christianity and his concept of God, he had become effectively unemployable by any German university. The subsequent "feelings of revenge and resentment" embittered him: "And hence my rage since I have grasped in the broadest possible sense what wretched means (the depreciation of my good name, my character, and my aims) suffice to take from me the trust of, and therewith the possibility of obtaining, pupils."[69]

In 1886, Nietzsche broke with his publisher Ernst Schmeitzner, disgusted by his antisemitic opinions. Nietzsche saw his own writings as "completely buried and unexhumeable in this anti-Semitic dump" of Schmeitzner—associating the publisher with a movement that should be "utterly rejected with cold contempt by every sensible mind".[70] He then printed Beyond Good and Evil at his own expense. He also acquired the publication rights for his earlier works and over the next year issued second editions of The Birth of Tragedy, Human, All Too Human, Daybreak, and The Gay Science with new prefaces placing the body of his work in a more coherent perspective. Thereafter, he saw his work as completed for a time and hoped that soon a readership would develop. In fact, interest in Nietzsche's thought did increase at this time, if rather slowly and hardly perceptibly to him. During these years Nietzsche met Meta von Salis, Carl Spitteler, and Gottfried Keller.

In 1886, his sister Elisabeth married the antisemite Bernhard Förster and travelled to Paraguay to found Nueva Germania, a "Germanic" colony—a plan Nietzsche responded to with mocking laughter.[71][not in citation given] Through correspondence, Nietzsche's relationship with Elisabeth continued through cycles of conflict and reconciliation, but they met again only after his collapse. He continued to have frequent and painful attacks of illness, which made prolonged work impossible.

In 1887, Nietzsche wrote the polemic On the Genealogy of Morality. During the same year, he encountered the work of Fyodor Dostoyevsky, to whom he felt an immediate kinship.[72] He also exchanged letters with Hippolyte Taine and Georg Brandes. Brandes, who had started to teach the philosophy of Søren Kierkegaard in the 1870s, wrote to Nietzsche asking him to read Kierkegaard, to which Nietzsche replied that he would come to Copenhagen and read Kierkegaard with him. However, before fulfilling this promise, he slipped too far into illness. In the beginning of 1888, Brandes delivered in Copenhagen one of the first lectures on Nietzsche's philosophy.

Although Nietzsche had previously announced at the end of On the Genealogy of Morality a new work with the title The Will to Power: Attempt at a Revaluation of All Values, he eventually seems to have abandoned this idea and instead used some of the draft passages to compose Twilight of the Idols and The Antichrist in 1888.[73]

His health seemed to improve and he spent the summer in high spirits. In the fall of 1888, his writings and letters began to reveal a higher estimation of his own status and "fate". He overestimated the increasing response to his writings, however, especially to the recent polemic, The Case of Wagner. On his 44th birthday, after completing Twilight of the Idols and The Antichrist, he decided to write the autobiography Ecce Homo. In its preface—which suggests Nietzsche was well aware of the interpretive difficulties his work would generate—he declares, "Hear me! For I am such and such a person. Above all, do not mistake me for someone else."[74] In December, Nietzsche began a correspondence with August Strindberg and thought that, short of an international breakthrough, he would attempt to buy back his older writings from the publisher and have them translated into other European languages. Moreover, he planned the publication of the compilation Nietzsche contra Wagner and of the poems that made up his collection Dionysian-Dithyrambs.

Psychological illness and death (1889–1900)


Drawing by Hans Olde from the photographic series, The Ill Nietzsche, late 1899

Turin house where Nietzsche stayed (background) seen from Piazza Carlo Alberto, where he is said to have had his breakdown (at left: rear façade of Palazzo Carignano)
On 3 January 1889, Nietzsche suffered a mental breakdown.[75] Two policemen approached him after he caused a public disturbance in the streets of Turin. What happened remains unknown, but an often-repeated tale from shortly after his death states that Nietzsche witnessed the flogging of a horse at the other end of the Piazza Carlo Alberto, ran to the horse, threw his arms up around its neck to protect it, and then collapsed to the ground.[76][77]

In the following few days, Nietzsche sent short writings—known as the Wahnzettel ("Madness Letters")—to a number of friends including Cosima Wagner and Jacob Burckhardt. Most of them were signed "Dionysos", though some were also signed "der Gekreuzigte" meaning "the crucified one". To his former colleague Burckhardt, Nietzsche wrote: "I have had Caiaphas put in fetters. Also, last year I was crucified by the German doctors in a very drawn-out manner. Wilhelm, Bismarck, and all anti-Semites abolished."[78] Additionally, he commanded the German emperor to go to Rome to be shot and summoned the European powers to take military action against Germany,[79] that the pope should be put in jail and that he, Nietzsche, created the world and was in the process of having all anti-Semites shot dead.[80]

On 6 January 1889, Burckhardt showed the letter he had received from Nietzsche to Overbeck. The following day, Overbeck received a similar letter and decided that Nietzsche's friends had to bring him back to Basel. Overbeck travelled to Turin and brought Nietzsche to a psychiatric clinic in Basel. By that time Nietzsche appeared fully in the grip of a serious mental illness, and his mother Franziska decided to transfer him to a clinic in Jena under the direction of Otto Binswanger. In January 1889, they proceeded with the planned release of Twilight of the Idols, by that time already printed and bound. From November 1889 to February 1890, the art historian Julius Langbehn attempted to cure Nietzsche, claiming that the methods of the medical doctors were ineffective in treating Nietzsche's condition. Langbehn assumed progressively greater control of Nietzsche until his secretiveness discredited him. In March 1890, Franziska removed Nietzsche from the clinic and, in May 1890, brought him to her home in Naumburg. During this process Overbeck and Gast contemplated what to do with Nietzsche's unpublished works. In February, they ordered a fifty-copy private edition of Nietzsche contra Wagner, but the publisher C.G. Naumann secretly printed one hundred. Overbeck and Gast decided to withhold publishing The Antichrist and Ecce Homo because of their more radical content. Nietzsche's reception and recognition enjoyed their first surge.[chronology citation needed]

In 1893, Nietzsche's sister Elisabeth returned from Nueva Germania in Paraguay following the suicide of her husband. She read and studied Nietzsche's works and, piece by piece, took control of them and their publication. Overbeck eventually suffered dismissal and Gast finally co-operated. After the death of Franziska in 1897, Nietzsche lived in Weimar, where Elisabeth cared for him and allowed visitors, including Rudolf Steiner (who in 1895 had written one of the first books praising Nietzsche),[81][page needed] to meet her uncommunicative brother. Elisabeth at one point went so far as to employ Steiner as a tutor to help her to understand her brother's philosophy. Steiner abandoned the attempt after only a few months, declaring that it was impossible to teach her anything about philosophy.[82]


Peter Gast "corrected" Nietzsche's writings after the breakdown without his approval
Nietzsche's mental illness was originally diagnosed as tertiary syphilis, in accordance with a prevailing medical paradigm of the time. Although most commentators regard his breakdown as unrelated to his philosophy, Georges Bataille dropped dark hints ("'Man incarnate' must also go mad")[83] and René Girard's postmortem psychoanalysis posits a worshipful rivalry with Richard Wagner.[84] Nietzsche had previously written, "All superior men who were irresistibly drawn to throw off the yoke of any kind of morality and to frame new laws had, if they were not actually mad, no alternative but to make themselves or pretend to be mad." (Daybreak, 14) The diagnosis of syphilis has since been challenged and a diagnosis of "manic-depressive illness with periodic psychosis followed by vascular dementia" was put forward by Cybulska prior to Schain's study.[85][86] Leonard Sax suggested the slow growth of a right-sided retro-orbital meningioma as an explanation of Nietzsche's dementia;[19][87] Orth and Trimble postulated frontotemporal dementia[88] while other researchers have proposed a hereditary stroke disorder called CADASIL.[89][90] Poisoning by mercury, a treatment for syphilis at the time of Nietzsche's death,[91] has also been suggested.[92]

In 1898 and 1899, Nietzsche suffered at least two strokes. This partially paralyzed him, leaving him unable to speak or walk. He likely suffered from clinical hemiparesis/hemiplegia on the left side of his body by 1899. After contracting pneumonia in mid-August 1900, he had another stroke during the night of 24–25 August and died at about noon on 25 August.[93] Elisabeth had him buried beside his father at the church in Röcken bei Lützen. His friend and secretary Gast gave his funeral oration, proclaiming: "Holy be your name to all future generations!"[94]


Nietzsche's grave at Röcken with the sculpture Das Röckener Bacchanal by Klaus Friedrich Messerschmidt (2000)
Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche compiled The Will to Power from Nietzsche's unpublished notebooks and published it posthumously. Because his sister arranged the book based on her own conflation of several of Nietzsche's early outlines and took great liberties with the material, the scholarly consensus has been that it does not reflect Nietzsche's intent. (For example, Elisabeth removed aphorism 35 of The Antichrist, where Nietzsche rewrote a passage of the Bible.) Indeed, Mazzino Montinari, the editor of Nietzsche's Nachlass, called it a forgery.[95]

Citizenship, nationality and ethnicity
General commentators and Nietzsche scholars, whether emphasizing his cultural background or his language, overwhelmingly label Nietzsche as a "German philosopher".[96][97][18][98] Others do not assign him a national category.[99][100][101] Germany had not yet been unified into a nation-state, but Nietzsche was born a citizen of Prussia, which was then part of the German Confederation.[102] His birthplace, Röcken, is in the modern German state of Saxony-Anhalt. When he accepted his post at Basel, Nietzsche applied for the annulment of his Prussian citizenship.[103] The official response confirming the revocation of his citizenship came in a document dated 17 April 1869,[104] and for the rest of his life he remained officially stateless.

Nietzsche believed his ancestors were Polish,[105] at least toward the end of his life. He wore a signet ring bearing the Radwan coat of arms, traceable back to Polish nobility of medieval times[106] and the surname "Nicki" of the Polish noble (szlachta) family bearing that coat of arms.[107][108] Gotard Nietzsche, a member of the Nicki family, left Poland for Prussia. His descendants later settled in the Electorate of Saxony circa the year 1700.[109] Nietzsche wrote in 1888, "My ancestors were Polish noblemen (Nietzky); the type seems to have been well preserved despite three generations of German mothers."[110] At one point, Nietzsche becomes even more adamant about his Polish identity. "I am a pure-blooded Polish nobleman, without a single drop of bad blood, certainly not German blood."[111] On yet another occasion, Nietzsche stated, "Germany is a great nation only because its people have so much Polish blood in their veins ... I am proud of my Polish descent."[112] Nietzsche believed his name might have been Germanized, in one letter claiming, "I was taught to ascribe the origin of my blood and name to Polish noblemen who were called Niëtzky and left their home and nobleness about a hundred years ago, finally yielding to unbearable suppression: they were Protestants."[113]

Most scholars dispute Nietzsche's account of his family's origins. Hans von Müller debunked the genealogy put forward by Nietzsche's sister in favor of a Polish noble heritage.[114] Max Oehler, the curator of the Nietzsche Archive at Weimar, argued that all of Nietzsche's ancestors bore German names, including the wives' families.[110] Oehler claims that Nietzsche came from a long line of German Lutheran clergymen on both sides of his family, and modern scholars regard the claim of Nietzsche's Polish ancestry as a "pure invention".[115] Colli and Montinari, the editors of Nietzsche's assembled letters, gloss Nietzsche's claims as a "mistaken belief" and "without foundation."[116][117] The name Nietzsche itself is not a Polish name, but an exceptionally common one throughout central Germany, in this and cognate forms (such as Nitsche and Nitzke). The name derives from the forename Nikolaus, abbreviated to Nick; assimilated with the Slavic Nitz, it first became Nitsche and then Nietzsche.[110]

It is not known why Nietzsche wanted to be thought of as Polish nobility. According to biographer R. J. Hollingdale, Nietzsche's propagation of the Polish ancestry myth may have been part of his "campaign against Germany".[110]

Relationships and sexuality
Nietzsche never married. He proposed to Lou Salomé three times, but his proposal was rejected each time.[118][full citation needed] There is a theory that blamed Salomé's view on sexuality as one of the reasons for her alienation from Nietzsche. As articulated in the 1898 novella Fenitschka, she viewed the idea of sexual intercourse as prohibitive and marriage as a violation, with some suggesting that they indicated sexual repression and neurosis.[119]

Nietzsche scholar Joachim Köhler [de] has attempted to explain Nietzsche's life history and philosophy by claiming that Nietzsche was homosexual. Köhler argues that Nietzsche's syphilis, which is "...usually considered to be the product of his encounter with a prostitute in a brothel in Cologne or Leipzig, is equally likely, it is now held, to have been contracted in a male brothel in Genoa."[120] The acquisition of the infection from a homosexual brothel was confirmed by Sigmund Freud, who cited Otto Binswanger as his source.[121] Köhler also suggests Nietzsche may have had a romantic relationship as well as a friendship with Paul Rée.[122] There is the claim that Nietzsche's homosexuality is widely known in the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society, with Nietzsche's friend Paul Deussen claiming that the philosopher never "touched a woman".[123][124]

Köhler's views have not found wide acceptance among Nietzsche scholars and commentators. Allan Megill argues that, while Köhler's claim that Nietzsche was in a confrontation with his homosexual desire cannot simply be dismissed, "the evidence is very weak," and Köhler may be projecting twentieth-century understandings of sexuality on nineteenth-century notions of friendship.[122] It is also known that Nietzsche frequented heterosexual brothels.[121] Some like Nigel Rodgers and Mel Thompson have argued that continuous sickness and headaches hindered Nietzsche from engaging much with women. Yet, they bring other examples in which Nietzsche expressed his affections to other women, including Wagner's wife Cosima Wagner.[125]

Other scholars have argued that Köhler's sexuality-based interpretation is not helpful in understanding Nietzsche's philosophy.[126][127] However, there are also those who stressed that, if Nietzsche preferred men—with this preference constituting his psycho-sexual make-up—but could not admit his desires to himself, it meant he acted in conflict with his philosophy.[128]

Philosophy

Nietzsche, 1869
Main article: Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche
Because of Nietzsche's evocative style and provocative ideas, his philosophy generates passionate reactions. His works remain controversial, due to their varying interpretations and misinterpretations. In the Western philosophy tradition, Nietzsche's writings have been described as the unique case of free revolutionary thought, that is, revolutionary in its structure and problems, although not tied to any revolutionary project.[129] His writings have also been described as a revolutionary project in which his philosophy serves as the foundation of a European cultural rebirth.[130][131]

Apollonian and Dionysian
Main article: Apollonian and Dionysian
The Apollonian and Dionysian is a two-fold philosophical concept, based on certain features of ancient Greek mythology: Apollo and Dionysus. Even though the concept is famously related to The Birth of Tragedy, the poet Hölderlin had already spoken of it, and Winckelmann had talked of Bacchus. One year before the publication of The Birth of Tragedy, Nietzsche wrote a fragment titled "On Music and Words".[132] In it he asserted the Schopenhauerian judgment that music is a primary expression of the essence of everything. Secondarily derivative are lyrical poetry and drama, which represent mere phenomenal appearances of objects. In this way, tragedy is born from music.

Nietzsche found in classical Athenian tragedy an art form that transcended the pessimism found in the so-called wisdom of Silenus. The Greek spectators, by looking into the abyss of human suffering depicted by characters on stage, passionately and joyously affirmed life, finding it worth living. A main theme in The Birth of Tragedy was that the fusion of Dionysian and Apollonian Kunsttrieben ("artistic impulses") forms dramatic arts, or tragedies. He goes on to argue that this fusion has not been achieved since the ancient Greek tragedians. Apollo represents harmony, progress, clarity and logic, whereas Dionysus represents disorder, intoxication, emotion and ecstasy. Nietzsche used these two forces because, for him, the world of mind and order on one side, and passion and chaos on the other formed principles that were fundamental to the Greek culture:[133][134] the Apollonian side being a dreaming state, full of illusions; and Dionysian being the state of intoxication, representing the liberations of instinct and dissolution of boundaries. In this mold, man appears as the satyr. He is the horror of the annihilation of the principle of individuality and at the same time someone who delights in its destruction.[135] Both of these principles are meant to represent cognitive states that appear through art as the power of nature in man.[136]

The relationship between the Apollonian and Dionysian juxtapositions is apparent, in the interplay of tragedy: the tragic hero of the drama, the main protagonist, struggles to make order (in the Apollonian sense) of his unjust and chaotic (Dionysian) fate, though he dies unfulfilled in the end. Elaborating on the conception of Hamlet as an intellectual who cannot make up his mind, and therefore is a living antithesis to the man of action, Nietzsche argues that a Dionysian figure possesses knowledge to realize that his actions cannot change the eternal balance of things, and it disgusts him enough not to be able to make any act at all. Hamlet falls under this category—he has glimpsed the supernatural reality through the Ghost, he has gained true knowledge and knows that no action of his has the power to change this.[137][138] For the audience of such drama, this tragedy allows them to sense an underlying essence, what Nietzsche called the Primordial Unity, which revives Dionysian nature. He describes this primordial unity as the increase of strength, experience of fullness and plenitude bestowed by frenzy. Frenzy acts as an intoxication, and is crucial for the physiological condition that enables making of any art.[139] Stimulated by this state, a person's artistic will is enhanced:

In this state one enriches everything out of one's own fullness: whatever one sees, whatever wills is seen swelled, taut, strong, overloaded with strength. A man in this state transforms things until they mirror his power—until they are reflections of his perfection. This having to transform into perfection is—art.

Nietzsche is adamant that the works of Aeschylus and Sophocles represent the apex of artistic creation, the true realization of tragedy; it is with Euripides, he states, that tragedy begins its Untergang (literally "going under" or "downward-way," meaning decline, deterioration, downfall, death, etc.). Nietzsche objects to Euripides' use of Socratic rationalism and morality in his tragedies, claiming that the infusion of ethics and reason robs tragedy of its foundation, namely the fragile balance of the Dionysian and Apollonian. Socrates emphasized reason to such a degree that he diffused the value of myth and suffering to human knowledge. Plato continued with this path in his dialogues, and the modern world eventually inherited reason at the expense of artistic impulses that could be found only in the Apollonian and Dionysus dichotomy. This leads to his conclusion that European culture from the time of Socrates had always been only Apollonian and thus decadent and unhealthy.[140] He notes that whenever Apollonian culture dominates, the Dionysian lacks the structure to make a coherent art, and when Dionysian dominates, the Apollonian lacks the necessary passion. Only the beautiful middle, the interplay of these two forces, brought together as an art, represented real Greek tragedy.[141]

An example of the impact of this idea can be seen in the book Patterns of Culture, where anthropologist Ruth Benedict uses Nietzschean opposites of "Apollonian" and "Dionysian" as the stimulus for her thoughts about Native American cultures.[142] Carl Jung has written extensively on the dichotomy in Psychological Types.[143] Michel Foucault has commented that his own book Madness and Civilization should be read "under the sun of the great Nietzschean inquiry". Here Foucault references Nietzsche's description of the birth and death of tragedy and his explanation that the subsequent tragedy of the Western world was the refusal of the tragic and, with that, refusal of the sacred.[144] Painter Mark Rothko was influenced by Nietzsche's view of tragedy, which were presented in The Birth of Tragedy.

Perspectivism
Main article: Perspectivism
Nietzsche claimed the death of God would eventually lead to the loss of any universal perspective on things, and along with it any coherent sense of objective truth.[145][146][page needed] Nietzsche himself rejected the idea of objective reality, arguing that knowledge is contingent and conditional, relative to various fluid perspectives or interests.[147] This leads to constant reassessment of rules (i.e., those of philosophy, the scientific method, etc.) according to the circumstances of individual perspectives.[148] This view has acquired the name perspectivism.

In Thus Spoke Zarathustra, Nietzsche proclaims that a table of values hangs above every great person. He points out that what is common among different peoples is the act of esteeming, of creating values, even if the values are different from one people to the next. Nietzsche asserts that what made people great was not the content of their beliefs, but the act of valuing. Thus the values a community strives to articulate are not as important as the collective will to see those values come to pass. The willing is more essential than the intrinsic worth of the goal itself, according to Nietzsche. "A thousand goals have there been so far," says Zarathustra, "for there are a thousand peoples. Only the yoke for the thousand necks is still lacking: the one goal is lacking. Humanity still has no goal." Hence, the title of the aphorism, "On The Thousand And One Goals". The idea that one value-system is no more worthy than the next, although it may not be directly ascribed to Nietzsche, has become a common premise in modern social science. Max Weber and Martin Heidegger absorbed it and made it their own. It shaped their philosophical and cultural endeavor, as well as their political understanding. Weber, for example, relies on Nietzsche's perspectivism by maintaining that objectivity is still possible—but only after a particular perspective, value, or end has been established.[149][150]

Among his critique of traditional philosophy of Kant, Descartes and Plato in Beyond Good and Evil, Nietzsche attacked thing in itself and cogito ergo sum ("I think, therefore I am") as unfalsifiable beliefs based on naive acceptance of previous notions and fallacies.[151] Philosopher Alasdair MacIntyre puts Nietzsche in a high place in the history of philosophy. While criticizing nihilism and Nietzsche together as a sign of general decay,[152] he still commends him for recognizing psychological motives behind Kant and Hume's moral philosophy:[153]

For it was Nietzsche's historic achievement to understand more clearly than any other philosopher...not only that what purported to be appeals of objectivity were in fact expressions of subjective will, but also the nature of the problems that this posed for philosophy.[154]

The "slave revolt" in morals
Main article: Master–slave morality

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
Find sources: "Friedrich Nietzsche" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (October 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
In Beyond Good and Evil and On the Genealogy of Morality, Nietzsche's genealogical account of the development of modern moral systems occupies a central place. For Nietzsche, a fundamental shift took place during human history from thinking in terms of good and bad toward good and evil.

The initial form of morality was set by a warrior aristocracy and other ruling castes of ancient civilizations. Aristocratic values of good and bad coincided with and reflected their relationship to lower castes such as slaves. Nietzsche presents this "master morality" as the original system of morality—perhaps best associated with Homeric Greece. To be "good" was to be happy and to have the things related to happiness: wealth, strength, health, power, etc. To be "bad" was to be like the slaves the aristocracy ruled over: poor, weak, sick, pathetic—an object of pity or disgust rather than hatred.

"Slave morality" comes about as a reaction to master-morality. Here, value emerges from the contrast between good and evil: good being associated with other-worldliness, charity, piety, restraint, meekness, and submission; and evil seen as worldly, cruel, selfish, wealthy, and aggressive. Nietzsche sees slave morality as pessimistic and fearful, values for them serving only to ease the existence for those who suffer from the very same thing. He associates slave-morality with the Jewish and Christian traditions, in a way that slave-morality is born out of the ressentiment of slaves. Nietzsche argued that the idea of equality allowed slaves to overcome their own condition without hating themselves. And by denying the inherent inequality of people (such as success, strength, beauty or intelligence), slaves acquired a method of escape, namely by generating new values on the basis of rejecting something that was seen as a perceived source of frustration. It was used to overcome the slave's own sense of inferiority before the (better-off) masters. It does so by making out slave weakness to be a matter of choice, by, e.g., relabeling it as "meekness". The "good man" of master morality is precisely the "evil man" of slave morality, while the "bad man" is recast as the "good man".

Nietzsche sees the slave-morality as a source of the nihilism that has overtaken Europe. Modern Europe and Christianity exist in a hypocritical state due to a tension between master and slave morality, both values contradictorily determining, to varying degrees, the values of most Europeans (who are "motley"). Nietzsche calls for exceptional people to no longer be ashamed of their uniqueness in the face of a supposed morality-for-all, which he deems to be harmful to the flourishing of exceptional people. He cautions, however, that morality, per se, is not bad; it is good for the masses, and should be left to them. Exceptional people, on the other hand, should follow their own "inner law". A favorite motto of Nietzsche, taken from Pindar, reads: "Become what you are."

A long standing assumption about Nietzsche is that he preferred master over slave morality. However, the Nietzsche scholar Walter Kaufmann rejected this interpretation, writing that Nietzsche's analyses of these two types of morality were only used in a descriptive and historic sense, they were not meant for any kind of acceptance or glorifications.[155] On the other hand, it is clear from his own writings that Nietzsche wanted the victory of master morality. He linked the "salvation and future of the human race with the unconditional dominance"[156] of master morality and called master morality "a higher order of values, the noble ones, those that say Yes to life, those that guarantee the future."[157] Just as "there is an order of rank between man and man," there is also an order of rank "between morality and morality."[158] Indeed, Nietzsche waged a philosophic war against the slave morality of Christianity in his "revaluation of all values" in order to bring about the victory of a new master morality that he called the "philosophy of the future" (Beyond Good and Evil is subtitled Prelude to a Philosophy of the Future).[159]

In Daybreak, Nietzsche begins his "Campaign against Morality".[160][161] He calls himself an "immoralist" and harshly criticizes the prominent moral philosophies of his day: Christianity, Kantianism, and utilitarianism. Nietzsche's concept "God is dead" applies to the doctrines of Christendom, though not to all other faiths: he claimed that Buddhism is a successful religion that he compliments for fostering critical thought.[162] Still, Nietzsche saw his philosophy as a counter-movement to nihilism through appreciation of art:

Art as the single superior counterforce against all will to negation of life, art as the anti-Christian, anti-Buddhist, anti-Nihilist par excellence."[163]

Nietzsche claimed that the Christian faith as practised was not a proper representation of Jesus' teachings, as it forced people merely to believe in the way of Jesus but not to act as Jesus did, in particular his example of refusing to judge people, something that Christians had constantly done the opposite of.[162] He condemned institutionalized Christianity for emphasizing a morality of pity (Mitleid), which assumes an inherent illness in society:[164]

Christianity is called the religion of pity. Pity stands opposed to the tonic emotions which heighten our vitality: it has a depressing effect. We are deprived of strength when we feel pity. That loss of strength which suffering as such inflicts on life is still further increased and multiplied by pity. Pity makes suffering contagious.[165]

In Ecce Homo Nietzsche called the establishment of moral systems based on a dichotomy of good and evil a "calamitous error",[166] and wished to initiate a re-evaluation of the values of the Judeo-Christian world.[167] He indicates his desire to bring about a new, more naturalistic source of value in the vital impulses of life itself.

While Nietzsche attacked the principles of Judaism, he was not antisemitic: in his work On the Genealogy of Morality, he explicitly condemns antisemitism, and points out that his attack on Judaism was not an attack on contemporary Jewish people but specifically an attack upon the ancient Jewish priesthood whom he claims antisemitic Christians paradoxically based their views upon.[168] An Israeli historian who performed a statistical analysis of everything Nietzsche wrote about Jews claims that cross references and context make clear that almost all (85%) negative comments are actually attacks on Christian doctrine or, sarcastically, on Richard Wagner.[169]

Nietzsche felt that modern antisemitism was "despicable" and against European ideals.[170] Its cause, in his opinion, was the growth in European nationalism and the endemic "jealousy and hatred" of Jewish success.[170] He wrote that Jews should be thanked for helping uphold a respect for the philosophies of ancient Greece,[170] and for giving rise to "the noblest human being (Christ), the purest philosopher (Baruch Spinoza), the mightiest book, and the most effective moral code in the world."[171]

Death of God and nihilism
Main articles: God is dead and Nihilism
The statement "God is dead", occurring in several of Nietzsche's works (notably in The Gay Science), has become one of his best-known remarks. On the basis of it, most commentators[172] regard Nietzsche as an atheist; others (such as Kaufmann) suggest that this statement reflects a more subtle understanding of divinity. Recent developments in modern science and the increasing secularization of European society had effectively 'killed' the Abrahamic God, who had served as the basis for meaning and value in the West for more than a thousand years. The death of God may lead beyond bare perspectivism to outright nihilism, the belief that nothing has any inherent importance and that life lacks purpose. Here he states that the Christian moral doctrine provides people with intrinsic value, belief in God (which justifies the evil in the world) and a basis for objective knowledge. In this sense, in constructing a world where objective knowledge is possible, Christianity is an antidote to a primal form of nihilism—the despair of meaninglessness. As Heidegger put the problem, "If God as the suprasensory ground and goal of all reality is dead, if the suprasensory world of the ideas has suffered the loss of its obligatory and above it its vitalizing and upbuilding power, then nothing more remains to which man can cling and by which he can orient himself."[173]

One such reaction to the loss of meaning is what Nietzsche calls passive nihilism, which he recognises in the pessimistic philosophy of Schopenhauer. Schopenhauer's doctrine—which Nietzsche also refers to as Western Buddhism—advocates separating oneself from will and desires in order to reduce suffering. Nietzsche characterises this ascetic attitude as a "will to nothingness", whereby life turns away from itself, as there is nothing of value to be found in the world. This moving away of all value in the world is characteristic of the nihilist, although in this, the nihilist appears to be inconsistent:[174]

A nihilist is a man who judges that the real world ought not to be, and that the world as it ought to be does not exist. According to this view, our existence (action, suffering, willing, feeling) has no meaning: this 'in vain' is the nihilists' pathos—an inconsistency on the part of the nihilists.

— Friedrich Nietzsche, KSA 12:9 [60], taken from The Will to Power, section 585, translated by Walter Kaufmann
Nietzsche approaches the problem of nihilism as a deeply personal one, stating that this problem of the modern world is a problem that has "become conscious" in him.[175] Furthermore, he emphasizes both the danger of nihilism and the possibilities it offers, as seen in his statement that "I praise, I do not reproach, [nihilism's] arrival. I believe it is one of the greatest crises, a moment of the deepest self-reflection of humanity. Whether man recovers from it, whether he becomes master of this crisis, is a question of his strength!"[176] According to Nietzsche, it is only when nihilism is overcome that a culture can have a true foundation on which to thrive. He wished to hasten its coming only so that he could also hasten its ultimate departure. Heidegger interprets the death of God with what he explains as the death of metaphysics. He concludes that metaphysics has reached its potential and that the ultimate fate and downfall of metaphysics was proclaimed with the statement "God is dead".

Will to power
Main article: Will to power
A basic element in Nietzsche's philosophical outlook is the "will to power" (der Wille zur Macht), which he maintained provides a basis for understanding human behavior—more so than competing explanations, such as the ones based on pressure for adaptation or survival.[177][178][179] As such, according to Nietzsche, the drive for conservation appears as the major motivator of human or animal behavior only in exceptions, as the general condition of life is not one of emergency, of 'struggle for existence'.[180] More often than not, self-conservation is but a consequence of a creature's will to exert its strength on the outside world.

In presenting his theory of human behavior, Nietzsche also addressed, and attacked, concepts from philosophies popularly embraced in his days, such as Schopenhauer's notion of an aimless will or that of utilitarianism. Utilitarians claim that what moves people is mainly the desire to be happy, to accumulate pleasure in their lives. But such a conception of happiness Nietzsche rejected as something limited to, and characteristic of, the bourgeois lifestyle of the English society,[181] and instead put forth the idea that happiness is not an aim per se—it is instead a consequence of a successful pursuit of one's aims, of the overcoming of hurdles to one's actions—in other words, of the fulfillment of the will.[182]

Related to his theory of the will to power is his speculation, which he did not deem final,[183] regarding the reality of the physical world, including inorganic matter—that, like man's affections and impulses, the material world is also set by the dynamics of a form of the will to power. At the core of his theory is a rejection of atomism—the idea that matter is composed of stable, indivisible units (atoms). Instead, he seems to have accepted the conclusions of Ruđer Bošković, who explained the qualities of matter as a result of an interplay of forces.[184][185] One study of Nietzsche defines his fully developed concept of the will to power as "the element from which derive both the quantitative difference of related forces and the quality that devolves into each force in this relation" revealing the will to power as "the principle of the synthesis of forces."[186] Of such forces Nietzsche said they could perhaps be viewed as a primitive form of the will. Likewise he rejected as a mere interpretation the view that the movement of bodies is ruled by inexorable laws of nature, positing instead that movement was governed by the power relations between bodies and forces.[187] Other scholars disagree that Nietzsche considered the material world to be a form of the will to power: Nietzsche thoroughly criticized metaphysics, and by including the will to power in the material world, he would simply be setting up a new metaphysics. Other than aphorism 36 in Beyond Good and Evil, where he raised a question regarding will to power as being in the material world, it was only in his notes (unpublished by himself), where he wrote about a metaphysical will to power. Nietzsche directed his landlord to burn those notes in 1888 when he left Sils Maria for the last time.[188]

Eternal return
Main article: Eternal return
"Eternal return" (also known as "eternal recurrence") is a hypothetical concept that posits that the universe has been recurring, and will continue to recur, in a self-similar form for an infinite number of times across infinite time or space. It is a purely physical concept, involving no supernatural reincarnation, but the return of beings in the same bodies. Nietzsche first invokes the idea of eternal return in a parable in Section 341 of The Gay Science, and also in the chapter "Of the Vision and the Riddle" in Thus Spoke Zarathustra, among other places.[189] Nietzsche contemplates the idea as potentially "horrifying and paralyzing," and says that its burden is the "heaviest weight" imaginable ("das schwerste Gewicht").[190] The wish for the eternal return of all events would mark the ultimate affirmation of life, a reaction to Schopenhauer's praise of denying the will‐to‐live. To comprehend eternal recurrence in his thought, and to not merely come to peace with it but to embrace it, requires amor fati, "love of fate".[191] As Heidegger points out in his lectures on Nietzsche, Nietzsche's first mention of eternal recurrence presents this concept as a hypothetical question rather than postulating it as a fact. According to Heidegger, it is the burden imposed by the question of eternal recurrence—whether or not such a thing could possibly be true—that is so significant in modern thought: "The way Nietzsche here patterns the first communication of the thought of the 'greatest burden' [of eternal recurrence] makes it clear that this 'thought of thoughts' is at the same time 'the most burdensome thought.'"[192]

Not only does Nietzsche posit that the universe is recurring over infinite time and space, but that the different versions of events that have occurred in the past may at one point or another take place again, hence "all configurations that have previously existed on this earth must yet meet..."[193] And with each version of events is hoping that some knowledge or awareness is gained to better the individual, hence "And thus it will happen one day that a man will be born again, just like me and a woman will be born, just like Mary—only that it is hoped to be that the head of this man may contain a little less foolishness..."[193]

Alexander Nehamas writes in Nietzsche: Life as Literature of three ways of seeing the eternal recurrence: "(A) My life will recur in exactly identical fashion." This expresses a totally fatalistic approach to the idea. "(B) My life may recur in exactly identical fashion." This second view conditionally asserts cosmology, but fails to capture what Nietzsche refers to in The Gay Science, 341. Finally, "(C) If my life were to recur, then it could recur only in identical fashion." Nehamas shows that this interpretation exists totally independently of physics and does not presuppose the truth of cosmology. Nehamas draws the conclusion that if individuals constitute themselves through their actions, then they can only maintain themselves in their current state by living in a recurrence of past actions (Nehamas 153). Nietzsche's thought is the negation of the idea of a history of salvation.[194]

Übermensch
Main article: Übermensch
Another concept important to an understanding of Nietzsche's thought is the Übermensch[195][196][197][198] Developing the idea of nihilism, Nietzsche wrote Thus Spoke Zarathustra, therein introducing the concept of a value-creating Übermensch, not as a project, but as an anti-project, the absence of any project.[129] According to Lampert, "the death of God must be followed by a long twilight of piety and nihilism (II. 19; III. 8). Zarathustra's gift of the overman is given to a mankind not aware of the problem to which the overman is the solution."[199] Zarathustra presents the overman as the creator of new values, and he appears as a solution to the problem of the death of God and nihilism. The overman does not follow morality of common people since that favors mediocrity but instead rises above the notion of good and evil and above the "herd".[200] In this way Zarathustra proclaims his ultimate goal as the journey towards the state of overman. He wants a kind of spiritual evolution of self-awareness and overcoming of traditional views on morality and justice that stem from the superstition beliefs still deeply rooted or related to the notion of God and Christianity.[201][better source needed]

While interpretations of Nietzsche's overman vary wildly, here is one of his quotations from Thus Spoke Zarathustra (Prologue, §§3–4):

I teach you the overman. Man is something that shall be overcome. What have you done to overcome him?... All beings so far have created something beyond themselves; and do you want to be the ebb of this great flood, and even go back to the beasts rather than overcome man? What is ape to man? A laughing stock or painful embarrassment. And man shall be that to overman: a laughing stock or painful embarrassment. You have made your way from worm to man, and much in you is still worm. Once you were apes, and even now, too, man is more ape than any ape... The overman is the meaning of the earth. Let your will say: the overman shall be the meaning of the earth... Man is a rope, tied between beast and overman—a rope over an abyss ... what is great in man is that he is a bridge and not an end.

Zarathustra contrasts the overman with the last man of egalitarian modernity (most obvious example being democracy), an alternative goal humanity might set for itself. The last man is possible only by mankind's having bred an apathetic creature who has no great passion or commitment, who is unable to dream, who merely earns his living and keeps warm. This concept appears only in Thus Spoke Zarathustra, and is presented as a condition that would render the creation of the overman impossible.[202]

Some have suggested that the notion of eternal return is related to the overman, since willing the eternal return of the same is a necessary step if the overman is to create new values, untainted by the spirit of gravity or asceticism. Values involve a rank-ordering of things, and so are inseparable from approval and disapproval; yet it was dissatisfaction that prompted men to seek refuge in other-worldliness and embrace other-worldly values. It could seem that the overman, in being devoted to any values at all, would necessarily fail to create values that did not share some bit of asceticism. Willing the eternal recurrence is presented as accepting the existence of the low while still recognizing it as the low, and thus as overcoming the spirit of gravity or asceticism. One must have the strength of the overman in order to will the eternal recurrence; that is, only the overman will have the strength to fully accept all of his past life, including his failures and misdeeds, and to truly will their eternal return. This action nearly kills Zarathustra, for example, and most human beings cannot avoid other-worldliness because they really are sick, not because of any choice they made.

The Nazis tried to incorporate the concept into their ideology. After his death, Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche became the curator and editor of her brother's manuscripts. She reworked Nietzsche's unpublished writings to fit her own German nationalist ideology while often contradicting or obfuscating Nietzsche's stated opinions, which were explicitly opposed to antisemitism and nationalism. Through her published editions, Nietzsche's work became associated with fascism and Nazism;[203] 20th century scholars contested this interpretation of his work and corrected editions of his writings were soon made available.

Although Nietzsche has famously been misrepresented as a predecessor to Nazism, he criticized anti-Semitism, pan-Germanism and, to a lesser extent, nationalism.[204] Thus, he broke with his editor in 1886 because of his opposition to his editor's anti-Semitic stances, and his rupture with Richard Wagner, expressed in The Case of Wagner and Nietzsche contra Wagner, both of which he wrote in 1888, had much to do with Wagner's endorsement of pan-Germanism and anti-Semitism—and also of his rallying to Christianity. In a March 29, 1887 letter to Theodor Fritsch, Nietzsche mocked anti-Semites, Fritsch, Eugen Dühring, Wagner, Ebrard, Wahrmund, and the leading advocate of pan-Germanism, Paul de Lagarde, who would become, along with Wagner and Houston Chamberlain, the main official influences of Nazism.[205] This 1887 letter to Fritsch ended by: "And finally, how do you think I feel when the name Zarathustra is mouthed by anti-Semites?"[206]

Critique of mass culture
Friedrich Nietzsche held a pessimistic view on modern society and culture. His views stand against the concept of popular culture. He believed the press and mass culture led to conformity and brought about mediocrity. Nietzsche saw a lack of intellectual progress, leading to the decline of the human species. According to Nietzsche, individuals needed to overcome this form of mass culture. He believed some people were able to become superior individuals through the use of will power. By rising above mass culture, society would produce higher, brighter and healthier human beings.[207]

Reading and influence

The residence of Nietzsche's last three years along with archive in Weimar, Germany, which holds many of Nietzsche's papers
Main article: Library of Friedrich Nietzsche
A trained philologist, Nietzsche had a thorough knowledge of Greek philosophy. He read Kant, Plato, Mill, Schopenhauer and Spir,[208] who became his main opponents in his philosophy, and later Baruch Spinoza, whom he saw as his "precursor" in many respects[209] but as a personification of the "ascetic ideal" in others. However, Nietzsche referred to Kant as a "moral fanatic", Plato as "boring", Mill as a "blockhead", and of Spinoza he said: "How much of personal timidity and vulnerability does this masquerade of a sickly recluse betray?"[210] He likewise expressed contempt for British author George Eliot.[211]

Nietzsche's philosophy, while innovative and revolutionary, was indebted to many predecessors. While at Basel, Nietzsche offered lecture courses on pre-Platonic philosophers for several years, and the text of this lecture series has been characterized as a "lost link" in the development of his thought. "In it concepts such as the will to power, the eternal return of the same, the overman, gay science, self-overcoming and so on receive rough, unnamed formulations and are linked to specific pre-Platonics, especially Heraclitus, who emerges as a pre-Platonic Nietzsche."[212] The pre-Socratic thinker Heraclitus was known for the rejection of the concept of being as a constant and eternal principle of universe, and his embrace of "flux" and incessant change. His symbolism of the world as "child play" marked by amoral spontaneity and lack of definite rules was appreciated by Nietzsche.[213] From his Heraclitean sympathy, Nietzsche was also a vociferous detractor of Parmenides, who opposed Heraclitus and believed all world is a single Being with no change at all.[214]

In his Egotism in German Philosophy, Santayana claimed that Nietzsche's whole philosophy was a reaction to Schopenhauer. Santayana wrote that Nietzsche's work was "an emendation of that of Schopenhauer. The will to live would become the will to dominate; pessimism founded on reflection would become optimism founded on courage; the suspense of the will in contemplation would yield to a more biological account of intelligence and taste; finally in the place of pity and asceticism (Schopenhauer's two principles of morals) Nietzsche would set up the duty of asserting the will at all costs and being cruelly but beautifully strong. These points of difference from Schopenhauer cover the whole philosophy of Nietzsche."[215]

Nietzsche expressed admiration for 17th-century French moralists such as La Rochefoucauld, La Bruyère and Vauvenargues,[216] as well as for Stendhal.[217] The organicism of Paul Bourget influenced Nietzsche,[218] as did that of Rudolf Virchow and Alfred Espinas.[219] Nietzsche wrote in a letter in 1867 that he was trying to improve his German style of writing with the help of Lessing, Lichtenberg and Schopenhauer. It was probably Lichtenberg (along with Paul Rée) whose aphoristic style of writing contributed to Nietzsche's own use of aphorism instead of an essay.[220] Nietzsche early learned of Darwinism through Friedrich Albert Lange.[221] The essays of Ralph Waldo Emerson had a profound influence on Nietzsche, who "loved Emerson from first to last",[222] wrote "Never have I felt so much at home in a book", and called him "[the] author who has been richest in ideas in this century so far."[223] Hippolyte Taine influenced Nietzsche's view on Rousseau and Napoleon.[224] Notably, he also read some of the posthumous works of Charles Baudelaire,[225] Tolstoy's My Religion, Ernest Renan's Life of Jesus and Fyodor Dostoyevsky's Demons.[225][226] Nietzsche called Dostoevsky "the only psychologist from whom I have anything to learn."[227] While Nietzsche never mentions Max Stirner, the similarities in their ideas have prompted a minority of interpreters to suggest a relationship between the two.[228][229][230][231][232][233][234] In 1861 Nietzsche wrote an enthusiastic essay on his "favorite poet", Friedrich Hölderlin, mostly forgotten at that time.[235] He also expressed deep appreciation for Stifter's Indian Summer,[236] Byron's Manfred and Twain's Tom Sawyer.[237]

Reception and legacy
Main article: Influence and reception of Friedrich Nietzsche

Portrait of Nietzsche by Edvard Munch, 1906

Statue of Nietzsche in Naumburg
Nietzsche's works did not reach a wide readership during his active writing career. However, in 1888 the influential Danish critic Georg Brandes aroused considerable excitement about Nietzsche through a series of lectures he gave at the University of Copenhagen. In the years after Nietzsche's death in 1900, his works became better known, and readers have responded to them in complex and sometimes controversial ways.[238] Many Germans eventually discovered his appeals for greater individualism and personality development in Thus Spoke Zarathustra, but responded to them divergently. He had some following among left-wing Germans in the 1890s; in 1894–1895 German conservatives wanted to ban his work as subversive. During the late 19th century Nietzsche's ideas were commonly associated with anarchist movements and appear to have had influence within them, particularly in France and the United States.[239][240][241] H.L. Mencken produced the first book on Nietzsche in English in 1907, The Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche, and in 1910 a book of translated paragraphs from Nietzsche, increasing knowledge of his philosophy in the United States.[242] Nietzsche is known today as a precursor to expressionism,[243] existentialism, and postmodernism.[244]

W.B. Yeats and Arthur Symons described Nietzsche as the intellectual heir to William Blake.[245] Symons went on to compare the ideas of the two thinkers in The Symbolist Movement in Literature, while Yeats tried to raise awareness of Nietzsche in Ireland.[246][247][248] A similar notion was espoused by W.H. Auden who wrote of Nietzsche in his New Year Letter (released in 1941 in The Double Man): "O masterly debunker of our liberal fallacies [...] all your life you stormed, like your English forerunner Blake".[249][250][251] Nietzsche made an impact on composers during the 1890s. Writer on music Donald Mitchell notes that Gustav Mahler was "attracted to the poetic fire of Zarathustra, but repelled by the intellectual core of its writings." He also quotes Mahler himself, and adds that he was influenced by Nietzsche's conception and affirmative approach to nature, which Mahler presented in his Third Symphony using Zarathustra's roundelay. Frederick Delius produced a piece of choral music, A Mass of Life, based on a text of Thus Spoke Zarathustra, while Richard Strauss (who also based his Also sprach Zarathustra on the same book), was only interested in finishing "another chapter of symphonic autobiography".[252] Famous writers and poets influenced by Nietzsche include André Gide, August Strindberg, Robinson Jeffers, Pío Baroja, D.H. Lawrence, Edith Södergran and Yukio Mishima.

Nietzsche was an early influence on the poetry of Rainer Maria Rilke. Knut Hamsun counted Nietzsche, along with Strindberg and Dostoyevsky, as one of his primary influences.[253] Author Jack London wrote that he was more stimulated by Nietzsche than by any other writer.[254] Critics have suggested that the character of David Grief in A Son of the Sun was based on Nietzsche.[255] Nietzsche's influence on Muhammad Iqbal is most evidenced in Asrar-i-Khudi (The Secrets of the Self).[256] Wallace Stevens[257] was another reader of Nietzsche, and elements of Nietzsche's philosophy were found throughout Steven's poetry collection Harmonium.[258][259] Olaf Stapledon was influenced by the idea of the Übermensch and it is a central theme in his books Odd John and Sirius.[260] In Russia, Nietzsche has influenced Russian symbolism[261] and figures such as Dmitry Merezhkovsky,[262] Andrei Bely,[263] Vyacheslav Ivanov and Alexander Scriabin have all incorporated or discussed parts of Nietzsche philosophy in their works. Thomas Mann's novel Death in Venice[264] shows a use of Apollonian and Dionysian, and in Doctor Faustus Nietzsche was a central source for the character of Adrian Leverkühn.[265][266] Hermann Hesse, similarly, in his Narcissus and Goldmund presents two main characters in the sense of Apollonian and Dionysian as the two opposite yet intertwined spirits. Painter Giovanni Segantini was fascinated by Thus Spoke Zarathustra, and he drew an illustration for the first Italian translation of the book. The Russian painter Lena Hades created the oil painting cycle Also Sprach Zarathustra dedicated to the book Thus Spoke Zarathustra.[267]

By World War I, Nietzsche had acquired a reputation as an inspiration for both right-wing German militarism and leftist politics. German soldiers received copies of Thus Spoke Zarathustra as gifts during World War I.[268][269] The Dreyfus affair provides a contrasting example of his reception: the French antisemitic Right labelled the Jewish and leftist intellectuals who defended Alfred Dreyfus as "Nietzscheans".[270] Nietzsche had a distinct appeal for many Zionist thinkers around the start of the 20th century, most notable being Ahad Ha'am,[271] Hillel Zeitlin,[272] Micha Josef Berdyczewski, A.D. Gordon[273] and Martin Buber, who went so far as to extoll Nietzsche as a "creator" and "emissary of life".[274] Chaim Weizmann was a great admirer of Nietzsche; the first president of Israel sent Nietzsche's books to his wife, adding a comment in a letter that "This was the best and finest thing I can send to you."[275] Israel Eldad, the ideological chief of the Stern Gang that fought the British in Palestine in the 1940s, wrote about Nietzsche in his underground newspaper and later translated most of Nietzsche's books into Hebrew.[276] Eugene O'Neill remarked that Zarathustra influenced him more than any other book he ever read. He also shared Nietzsche's view of tragedy.[277] Plays The Great God Brown and Lazarus Laughed are an example of Nietzsche's influence on O'Neill.[278][279][280] Nietzsche's influence on the works of Frankfurt School philosophers Max Horkheimer and Theodor W. Adorno[281] can be seen in the popular Dialectic of Enlightenment. Adorno summed up Nietzsche's philosophy as expressing the "humane in a world in which humanity has become a sham."[282]

Nietzsche's growing prominence suffered a severe setback when his works became closely associated with Adolf Hitler and Nazi Germany. Many political leaders of the twentieth century were at least superficially familiar with Nietzsche's ideas, although it is not always possible to determine whether they actually read his work. It is debated among scholars whether Hitler read Nietzsche, although if he did his reading of him may not have been extensive.[283][284][285][286] He was a frequent visitor to the Nietzsche museum in Weimar and did use expressions of Nietzsche's, such as "lords of the earth" in Mein Kampf.[287] The Nazis made selective use of Nietzsche's philosophy. Mussolini,[288][289] Charles de Gaulle[290] and Huey P. Newton[291] read Nietzsche. Richard Nixon read Nietzsche with "curious interest," and his book Beyond Peace might have taken its title from Nietzsche's book Beyond Good and Evil which Nixon read beforehand.[292] Bertrand Russell wrote that Nietzsche had exerted great influence on philosophers and on people of literary and artistic culture, but warned that the attempt to put Nietzsche's philosophy of aristocracy into practice could only be done by an organization similar to the Fascist or the Nazi party.[14]

A decade after World War II, there was a revival of Nietzsche's philosophical writings thanks to exhaustive translations and analyses by Walter Kaufmann and R.J. Hollingdale. Others, well known philosophers in their own right, wrote commentaries on Nietzsche's philosophy, including Martin Heidegger, who produced a four-volume study, and Lev Shestov, who wrote a book called Dostoyevski, Tolstoy and Nietzsche where he portrays Nietzsche and Dostoyevski as the "thinkers of tragedy".[293] Georg Simmel compares Nietzsche's importance to ethics to that of Copernicus for cosmology.[294] Sociologist Ferdinand Tönnies read Nietzsche avidly from his early life, and later frequently discussed many of his concepts in his own works. Nietzsche has influenced philosophers such as Heidegger, Jean-Paul Sartre,[295] Oswald Spengler,[296] George Grant,[297] Emil Cioran,[298] Albert Camus, Ayn Rand,[299] Jacques Derrida, Leo Strauss,[300] Max Scheler, Michel Foucault and Bernard Williams. Camus described Nietzsche as "the only artist to have derived the extreme consequences of an aesthetics of the absurd".[301] Paul Ricœur called Nietzsche one of the masters of the "school of suspicion", alongside Karl Marx and Sigmund Freud.[302] Carl Jung was also influenced by Nietzsche.[303] In Memories, Dreams, Reflections, a biography transcribed by his secretary, he cites Nietzsche as a large influence.[304] Aspects of Nietzsche's philosophy, especially his ideas of the self and his relation to society, also run through much of late-twentieth and early twenty-first century thought.[305][306] His deepening of the romantic-heroic tradition of the nineteenth century, for example, as expressed in the ideal of the "grand striver" appears in the work of thinkers from Cornelius Castoriadis to Roberto Mangabeira Unger.[307] For Nietzsche this grand striver overcomes obstacles, engages in epic struggles, pursues new goals, embraces recurrent novelty, and transcends existing structures and contexts. No social or cultural construct can contain this idealized individual.[305]:195

Works

The Nietzsche Stone, near Surlej, the inspiration for Thus Spoke Zarathustra
Main article: Friedrich Nietzsche bibliography
See also: List of works about Friedrich Nietzsche
The Birth of Tragedy (1872)
On Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral Sense (1873)
Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks (1873)
Untimely Meditations (1876)
Human, All Too Human (1878)
The Dawn (1881)
The Gay Science (1882)
Thus Spoke Zarathustra (1883)
Beyond Good and Evil (1886)
On the Genealogy of Morality (1887)
The Case of Wagner (1888)
Twilight of the Idols (1888)
The Antichrist (1888)
Ecce Homo (1888; first published in 1908)
Nietzsche contra Wagner (1888)
The Will to Power (various unpublished manuscripts edited by his sister Elisabeth; not recognized as a unified work after ca 1960)
See also
	Philosophy portal
icon	Atheism portal
flag	Germany portal
	Biography portal
	Friedrich Nietzsche portal
Anarchism and Friedrich Nietzsche
The Ascent of Man
Difference (poststructuralism)
Dionysos
Friedrich Nietzsche and free will
Genealogy (philosophy)
References
 Guyer, Paul; Horstmann, Rolf-Peter (2015). Zalta, Edward N., ed. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
 Dale Wilkerson. "Friedrich Nietzsche". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. ISSN 2161-0002. Retrieved 9 April 2018.
 Brobjer, Thomas H. (2008). Nietzsche's Philosophical Context: An Intellectual Biography. University of Illinois Press. p. 149 n. 42. ISBN 978-0-252-03245-5.
 "Der Philosoph Philipp Mainländer entdeckt das Nirwanaprinzip: Die Welt als Gottes Selbstmordprojekt". Neue Zürcher Zeitung. 15 March 2003. Immerhin hat kein Geringerer als Friedrich Nietzsche, solange er wie Mainländer Schopenhauer verehrte, den philosophischen Mitjünger gewürdigt (beider Lektüreerlebnis gleicht als Erweckung dem augustinischen "Nimm, lies" bis ins Detail).
 Michael N. Forster. After Herder: Philosophy of Language in the German Tradition. Oxford University Press. 2010. p. 9.
 Wells, John C (1990), "Nietzsche", Longman Pronunciation Dictionary, Harlow, UK: Longman, p. 478, ISBN 978-0-582-05383-0
 "Nietzsche". Dictionary.com.
 Duden. Das Aussprachewörterbuch. 7. Auflage. Bibliographisches Institut, Berlin 2015, ISBN 978-3-411-04067-4, S. 633 (online)
 Krech, Eva-Maria; Stock, Eberhard; Hirschfeld, Ursula; Anders, Lutz Christian (2009). Deutsches Aussprachewörterbuch [German Pronunciation Dictionary] (in German). Berlin: Walter de Gruyter. pp. 520, 777. ISBN 978-3-11-018202-6.
 Wells, John C. (2008), Longman Pronunciation Dictionary (3rd ed.), Longman, ISBN 978-1-4058-8118-0
 Magnus, Bernd (1999-07-26). "Friedrich Nietzsche". Encyclopædia Britannica.
 "Friedrich Nietzsche," by Dale Wilkerson, The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ISSN 2161-0002, http://www.iep.utm.edu/nietzch/[permanent dead link]. 14 October 2015.
 Raymond A. Belliotti, Jesus or Nietzsche: How Should We Live Our Lives? (Rodopi, 2013), 195–201
 Russell, Bertrand (1945). A History of Western Philosophy. New York: Simon and Schuster. pp. 766, 770. ISBN 978-0-671-20158-6.
 Wicks, R. (Summer 2011) "Friedrich Nietzsche". The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Edward N. Zalta (ed.). Retrieved 6 October 2011.
 Anderson, R. Lanier (17 March 2017). "Friedrich Nietzsche". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.
 Brobjer, Thomas. Nietzsche's philosophical context: an intellectual biography, p. 42. University of Illinois Press, 2008.
 Magnus 1999.
 Robert Matthews (4 May 2003), "'Madness' of Nietzsche was cancer not syphilis", The Daily Telegraph.
 McKinnon, A.M. (2012). 'Metaphors in and for the Sociology of Religion: Towards a Theory after Nietzsche'. Journal of Contemporary Religion, vol 27, no. 2, pp. 203–16 [1]
 See his own words: F. Nietzsche (1888), Twilight of the Idols. "Four Great Errors", 1, tr. W. Kaufmann & R.J. Hollingdale (online version). A strict example of a cause-and-effect mismatch, with regard to the God-creator as the cause and our concepts as the effects, is perhaps not fully stressed in this fragment, but the more explicit it is stressed in the same book, chapter ""Reason" in philosophy", 4, as well as in The Antichrist (57, where real and imaginary origins are contrasted, and 62, where he calls Christianity 'a fatality'—'fatal' also meaning 'unavoidable') and in The Genealogy of Morals, books 1–3, among others. The topic of "false origins" of ideas is also suggested in The Four Great Errors, 3, and (precisely about morality) in e.g. The Will to Power, tr. W. Kaufmann, 343 (online text here).
 K. Gemes, J. Richardson, The Oxford Handbook of Nietzsche, Oxford Univ. Press, 2013, pp. 177–78 ("The Duality of Nietzsche's Theory of the Will to Power: The Psychological and Cosmological Aspects"). Read online here
 1941–, Lampert, Laurence (1986). Nietzsche's teaching : an interpretation of Thus spoke Zarathustra. New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-04430-0. OCLC 13497182.
 Bowman, William (2016). Friedrich Nietzsche: Herald of a New Era. Hazar Press. pp. 39–59. ISBN 978-0-9975703-0-4.
 Golomb, Jacob and Robert S. Wistrich (eds.), 2002, Nietzsche, Godfather of Fascism?: On the Uses and Abuses of a Philosophy. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
 Marianne Constable, "Genealogy and Jurisprudence: Nietzsche, Nihilism, and the Social Scientification of Law," Law & Social Inquiry 19, no. 3 (1 July 1994): 551–90.
 "100 years after death, Nietzsche's popularity keeps growing: 6/01".
 Kaufmann 1974, p. 22.
 Wicks, Robert (2014). Zalta, Edward N., ed. Friedrich Nietzsche (Winter 2014 ed.).
 Brobjer, Thomas H. "Why Did Nietzsche Receive a Scholarship to Study at Schulpforta?". Nietzsche-Studien. 30: 322–27.
 Krell, David Farrell, and Donald L. Bates. The Good European: Nietzsche's work sites in word and image. University of Chicago Press, 1997.
 Cate 2005, p. 37.
 Hayman, Ronald. Nietzsche: A Critical Life, p. 42. Oxford University Press, 1980.
 Kohler, Joachim. Nietzsche & Wagner: A Lesson in Subjugation, p. 17. Yale University Press, 1998.
 Hollingdale 1999, p. 21.
 His "valedictorian paper" (Valediktionsarbeit, graduation thesis for Pforta students) was titled "On Theognis of Megara" ("De Theognide Megarensi"); see Anthony K. Jensen, Helmut Heit (eds.), Nietzsche as a Scholar of Antiquity, A&C Black, 2014, p. 4.
 Schaberg, William (1996), The Nietzsche Canon, University of Chicago Press, p. 32
 Salaquarda, Jörg (1996), "Nietzsche and the Judaeo-Christian tradition", The Cambridge Companion to Nietzsche, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 99
 Higgins, Kathleen (2000), What Nietzsche Really Said, Random House, NY, p. 86
 Nietzsche, Letter to His Sister (1865). Archived from the original on 24 November 2012.
 Pence, Charles H. (2011). "Nietzsche's aesthetic critique of Darwin". History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences. 33 (2): 165–90. PMID 22288334.
 Hayman, Ronald. Nietzsche: A Critical Life, p. 93. Oxford University Press (New York), 1980.
 Nietzsche, Friedrich. Letter to Karl Von Gersdorff, June 1868.
 Nietzsche, Friedrich (November 1868), Letter to Rohde
 Anthony K. Jensen, Helmut Heit (eds.), Nietzsche as a Scholar of Antiquity, A&C Black, 2014, p. 129.
 Kaufmann 1974, p. 25.
 Bishop, Paul (2004), Nietzsche and Antiquity, p. 117
 Anthony K. Jensen, Helmut Heit (eds.), Nietzsche as a Scholar of Antiquity, A&C Black, 2014, p. 115.
 George E. McCarthy, Dialectics and Decadence
 Between 1868 and 1870, he published two other studies on Diogenes Laertius: De Fontibus Diogenis Laertii ("On the Sources of Diogenes Laertius"; Part I: 1868, Part II: 1869) and Analecta Laertiana (1870); see Jensen and Heit (eds.), 2014, p. 115.
 Hecker, Hellmuth: "Nietzsches Staatsangehörigkeit als Rechtsfrage", Neue Juristische Wochenschrift, Jg. 40, 1987, nr. 23, pp. 1388–91.
 His, Eduard: "Friedrich Nietzsches Heimatlosigkeit", Basler Zeitschrift für Geschichte und Altertumskunde, vol. 40, 1941, pp. 159–86. Note that some authors (among them Deussen and Montinari) mistakenly claim that Nietzsche became a Swiss citizen.
 Sax, L. (2003). "What was the cause of Nietzsche's dementia?". Journal of Medical Biography. 11 (1): 47–54. doi:10.1177/096777200301100113. PMID 12522502.
 Schain, Richard (2001), The Legend of Nietzsche's Syphilis, Westwood: Greenwood Press.[full citation needed]
 Green, M.S. Nietzsche and the Transcendental Tradition. University of Illinois Press, 2002.[full citation needed]
 Rupert Hughes, The Love Affairs of Great Musicians, Volume 2.
 Safranski, Rüdiger (trans. Shelley Frisch). Nietzsche: A Philosophical Biography, p. 161. W.W. Norton & Company, 2003. "This work had long been consigned to oblivion, but it had a lasting impact on Nietzsche. Section 18 of Human, All Too Human cited Spir, not by name, but by presenting a 'proposition by an outstanding logician' (2,38; HH I §18)."
 Güntzel, Stephan (15 October 2003), "Nietzsche's Geophilosophy", Journal of Nietzsche Studies (in English and German), University Park (Penn State), 25: 85, archived from the original on 27 September 2007; republished on HyperNietzsche.
 Cate 2005, p. 221.
 Cate 2005, p. 297.
 Cate 2005, p. 415.
 "Nietzsche and Lou Andreas-Salomé", F Nietzsche, DE
 Hollingdale 1999, p. 149.
 Hollingdale 1999, p. 151.
 Kaufmann 1974, p. 49.
 Hollingdale 1999, p. 152.
 Cate 2005, p. 389.
 Cate 2005, p. 453.
 Nietzsche, Friedrich. Letter to Peter Gast. August 1883.
 "Correspondences". Thenietzschechannel.com. 1 February 2000. Retrieved 27 November 2013.
 "Förster-Nietzsche, Elisabeth". Encyclopædia Britannica (online ed.). 10 October 2008.[permanent dead link]
 Nietzsche, Friedrich. Letter to Peter Gast. March 1887.
 Montinari, Mazzino (1974), Friedrich Nietzsche translated as Friedrich Nietzsche. Eine Einführung (in German), Berlin-New York: De Gruyter, 1991; and Friedrich Nietzsche (in French), PUF, 2001
 Nietzsche 1888d, Preface, section 1.
 Magnus, Bernd; Higgins, Kathleen Marie, eds. (1996). The Cambridge Companion to Nietzsche. Cambridge University Press. pp. 79–81. ISBN 978-0-521-36767-7.
 Kaufmann 1974, p. 67.
 Anacleto Verrecchia, "Nietzsche's Breakdown in Turin," in Nietzsche in Italy, ed. Thomas Harrison (Stanford University: ANMA Libri, 1988) 105–12
 Simon, Gerald (January 1889). "Nietzsches Briefe. Ausgewählte Korrespondenz. Wahnbriefe". The Nietzsche Channel. Retrieved 24 August 2013. Ich habe Kaiphas in Ketten legen lassen; auch bin ich voriges Jahr von den deutschen Ärzten auf eine sehr langwierige Weise gekreuzigt worden. Wilhelm, Bismarck und alle Antisemiten abgeschafft.
 Zweig, Stefan (1939), Master Builders [trilogy], The Struggle with the Daimon, Viking Press, p. 524.
 Nietzsches Briefe, Ausgewählte Korrespondenz, Wahnzettel 1889.
 Steiner, Rudolf (1895), Friedrich Nietzsche, ein Kämpfer gegen seine Zeit, Weimar
 Bailey, Andrew (2002), First Philosophy: Fundamental Problems and Readings in Philosophy, Broadview Press, p. 704
 Bataille, Georges (translated by Annette Michelson), "Writings on Laughter, Sacrifice, Nietzsche, Un-Knowing," Special issue, October no. 36, Spring 1986, pp. 42–45.
 René Girard, "Superman in the Underground: Strategies of Madness—Nietzsche, Wagner, and Dostoevsky", MLN, Vol. 91, No. 6, Comparative Literature. (December 1976), pp. 1161–85.
 Cybulska, EM (August 2000). "The madness of Nietzsche: a misdiagnosis of the millennium?". Hospital Medicine. 61 (8): 571–75. doi:10.12968/hosp.2000.61.8.1403. PMID 11045229.
 Schain, Richard (2001). The Legend of Nietzsche's Syphilis. Westport: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-31940-2.[page needed]
 Leonard Sax, "What was the cause of Nietzsche's dementia?" Journal of Medical Biography 2003; 11: 47–54.
 Orth, M; Trimble, MR (December 2006). "Friedrich Nietzsche's mental illness—general paralysis of the insane vs. frontotemporal dementia". Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica. 114 (6): 439–44, discussion 445. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0447.2006.00827.x. PMID 17087793.
 Hemelsoet D, Hemelsoet K, Devreese D (March 2008). "The neurological illness of Friedrich Nietzsche". Acta Neurologica Belgica. 108 (1): 9–16. PMID 18575181. Archived from the original on 6 July 2011.
 Robert Wicks, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, first published Fri 30 May 1997; substantive revision Fri 29 April 2011, Friedrich Nietzsche. Retrieved 19 January 2014, "...some maintain that he suffered from CADASIL syndrome, a hereditary stroke disorder...."
 Dayan, L; Ooi, C (October 2005). "Syphilis treatment: old and new". Expert Opinion on Pharmacotherapy. 6 (13): 2271–80. doi:10.1517/14656566.6.13.2271. PMID 16218887.
 Hammond, David (2013). Mercury Poisoning: The Undiagnosed Epidemic. p. 11.
 Concurring reports in Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche's biography (1904) and a letter by Mathilde Schenk-Nietzsche to Meta von Salis, 30 August 1900, quoted in Janz (1981) p. 221. Cf. Volz (1990), p. 251.
 Schain, Richard, Nietzsche's Visionary Values – Genius or Dementia?, Philosophos, archived from the original on 13 May 2006
 Montinari, Mazzino. The 'Will to Power' Does Not Exist.
 "Nietzsche", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2017
 Tanner, Michael (2000), Nietzsche: A Very Short Introduction, preview, ISBN 978-0-19-285414-8
 Magnus, Bernd; Higgins, Kathleen Marie (1996). The Cambridge Companion to Nietzsche. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-521-36767-7.
 Craid, Edward, ed. (2005), The Shorter Routledge Encyclopedia of philosophy, Abingdon: Routledge, pp. 726–41
 Blackburn, Simon (2005), The Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 252–53
 Rée, Jonathan; Urmson, JO, eds. (2005) [1960]. The Concise encyclopedia of western philosophy (3rd ed.). London: Routledge. pp. 267–70. ISBN 978-0-415-32924-8.
 Mencken, Henry Louis (2008). The Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche. Wilder Publications. pp. 11–. ISBN 978-1-60459-331-0.
 Janz, Curt Paul (1978), Friedrich Nietzsche: Biographie, 1, Munich: Carl Hanser, p. 263, Er beantragte also bei der preussischen Behörde seine Expatriierung (translation: he accordingly applied to the Prussian authorities for expatrification)
 Colli, Giorgio; Montinari, Mazzino (1993), "Entlassungsurkunde für den Professor Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche aus Naumburg", Nietzsche Briefwechsel: Kritische Gesamtausgabe (in German), I.4, Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, p. 566, ISBN 978-3-11-012277-0
 Mencken, Henry Louis (1913). Friedrich Nietzsche. Transaction Publishers. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-56000-649-7.
 Warberg, Ulla-Karin. "Nietzsche's ring". auktionsverket.com. Östermalm, Stockholm, SWEDEN: Stockholms Auktionsverk. Archived from the original on 24 June 2017. Retrieved 16 August 2018. Nietzsche's ring ... it was worn by Friedrich Nietzsche and it represents the ancient Radwan coat of arms, which can be traced back to the Polish nobility of medieval times.
 Niesiecki, Kasper; Bobrowicz, Jan Nepomucen (1841) [1728]. "Radwan Herb" [Radwan Coat of Arms] (Online book). Herbarz Polski Kaspra Niesieckiego S.J., powiększony dodatkami z poźniejszych autorów, rękopismów, dowodów urzędowych i wydany przez Jana Nep. Bobrowicza [Polish armorial of Kasper Niesiecki S.J., enlarged by additions from other authors, manuscripts, official proofs and published by Jan Nep. Bobrowicz.] (Noble/szlachta genealogical and heraldic reference). VIII. Leipzig, Germany: Breitkopf & Härtel. p. 28. Herbowni ... Nicki, ... (Heraldic Family ... Nicki, ...)
 Niesiecki, Kasper; Bobrowicz, Jan Nepomucen (1845) [1728]. "Kasper Niesiecki, Herbarz Polski, wyd. J.N. Bobrowicz, Lipsk 1839-1845: herb Radwan (t. 8 s. 27-29)" (website). wielcy.pl (Noble/szlachta genealogical and heraldic reference) (in Polish). Kraków, POLAND, EU: Dr Minakowski Publikacje Elektroniczne. Archived from the original on 17 August 2018. Retrieved 17 August 2018. Herbowni ... Nicki, ... (Heraldic Family ... Nicki, ...)
 Warberg, Ulla-Karin. "Nietzsche's ring". auktionsverket.com. Östermalm, Stockholm, SWEDEN: Stockholms Auktionsverk. Archived from the original on 24 June 2017. Retrieved 16 August 2018. In 1905, the Polish writer Bernhard Scharlitt in the spirit of Polish patriotism wrote an article about the Nietzsche family. In Herbarz Polski, a genealogy of Polish nobility, he had come across a note about a family named 'Nicki', who could be traced back to Radwan. A member of this family named Gotard Nietzsche had left Poland for Prussia, and his descendants had eventually settled in Saxony around the year 1700.
 Hollingdale 1999, p. 6.
 Fredrick Appel Cornell, Nietzsche Contra Democracy. University Press (1998), p. 114
 Mencken, Henry Louis (2006) [1908], The Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche, University of Michigan, p. 6
 Letter to Heinrich von Stein, December 1882, KGB III 1, Nr. 342, p. 287; KGW V 2, p. 579; KSA 9 p. 681
 von Müller, "Nietzsches Vorfahren", reprinted Nietzsche-Studien 31 (2002): 253–75.
 Mencken, Henry Louis (2003), The Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzche, introd. & comm. Charles Q. Bufe, US: See Sharp Press, p. 2
 Letter to Heinrich von Stein, December 1882, KGB III 7.1 p. 313.
 Letter to Georg Brandes, 10. 4. 1888, KGB III 7.3/1 p. 293.
 "Nietzsche's and Nietzsche and Lou Andreas-Salomé." Nietzsche's and Nietzsche and Lou Andreas-Salomé.
 Diethe, Carol (1996). Nietzsche's Women: Beyond the Whip. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter. p. 56. ISBN 978-3-11-014819-0.
 Köhler, Joachim (2002). Zarathustra's secret: the interior life of Friedrich Nietzsche. New Haven: Yale University Press. p. xv. ISBN 978-0-300-09278-3.
 Golomb, Jacob (2001). Nietzsche and Jewish Culture. London: Routledge. p. 202. ISBN 978-0-415-09512-9.
 Allan Megill (1996). "Historicizing Nietzsche? Paradoxes and Lessons of a Hard Case". The Journal of Modern History. 68 (1): 114–52. doi:10.1086/245288. JSTOR 2124335.
 Pletsch, Carl (1992). Young Nietzsche: Becoming a Genius. New York: The Free Press. p. 67. ISBN 978-0-02-925042-6.
 Small, Robin (2007). Nietzsche and Rée: A Star Friendship. Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 207. ISBN 978-0-19-927807-7.
 Rogers, N., & Thompson, M. (2004). Philosophers Behaving Badly. London: Peter Owen.
 Michael W. Grenke (2003). "How Boring...". The Review of Politics. 65 (1): 152–54. doi:10.1017/s0034670500036640. JSTOR 1408799.
 Mathias Risse (2003-01-13). "Zarathustra's Secret. The Interior Life of Friedrich Nietzsche". Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews.
 Clark, Maudemarie (2015). Nietzsche on Ethics and Politics. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 154. ISBN 978-0-19-937184-6.
 Benjamin Bennett (2001). Goethe As Woman: The Undoing of Literature. Wayne State University Press. p. 184. ISBN 978-0-8143-2948-1. Retrieved 3 January 2013.
 Young, Julian (2010). Friedrich Nietzsche: A Philosophical Biography. Cambridge University Press.
 Bowman, William (2016). Friedrich Nietzsche: Herald of a New Era. Hazar Press. ISBN 978-0-9975703-0-4.
 On Music and words.
 Nietzsche, Dionysus and Apollo.
 Desmond, Kathleen K (2011). Ideas About Art. ISBN 978-1-4443-9600-3.
 The Apollonianism and Dionysiansism by Friedrich Nietzsche.
 Dionysus in Nietzsche and Greek Myth. Archived from the original on 14 August 2012.
 Procrastination in Shakespeare's Hamlet.
 Nietzsche on Hamlet (Commonplace Book). 2006.
 The role of art in Nietzsche's philosophy.
 Dionysus versus Apollo.
 The Birth of Tragedy Summary.
 Benedict, Ruth. Patterns of Culture.
 Influence of C.G. Jung on PKD – notes by Frank Bertrand, excerpt Umland. 2011.
 Mahon, Michael (1992). Foucault's Nietzschean Genealogy. ISBN 978-0-7914-1149-0.
 Lampert 1986, pp. 17–18.
 Heidegger.
 Cristoph, Cox (1999). Nietzsche: Naturalism and Interpretation. ISBN 978-0-520-92160-3.
 Schacht, Richard (1983). Nietzsche. p. 61.
 Steve, Hoenisch. Max Weber's View of Objectivity in Social Science.
 Nobre, Renarde Freire (2006). "Culture and perspectivism in Nietzsche's and Weber's view". Teoria & Sociedade. 2 (SE): 0.
 Objective and subjective reality; perspectivism. 2011.
 Solomon, Robert C (1989). From Hegel to Existentialism. ISBN 978-0-19-506182-6.
 Murphy, Mark C (2003). Alasdair MacIntyre. ISBN 978-0-521-79381-0.
 Lutz, Christopher Stephen (2009). Tradition in the ethics of Alasdair MacIntyre. ISBN 978-0-7391-4148-9.
 Kaufmann, Walter Arnold (1980). From Shakespeare to existentialism. ISBN 978-0-691-01367-1.
 Nietzsche, Friedrich (1887). On the Genealogy of Morals. p. First essay, section 16.
 Nietzsche, Friedrich (1908). Ecce Homo. p. Chapter on The Case of Wagner, section 2.
 Nietzsche, Friedrich (1886). Beyond Good and Evil. p. Section 228.
 Bowman, William (2016). Friedrich Nietzsche: Herald of a New Era. Hazar Press. pp. 31–38, 60–106. ISBN 978-0-9975703-0-4.
 Kaufmann 1974, p. 187.
 Nietzsche 1888d, M I.
 Sedgwick 2009, p. 26.
 Art in Nietzsche's philosophy.
 Sedgwick 2009, p. 27.
 The Antichrist, section 7. transl. Walter Kaufmann, in The Portable Nietzsche, 1977, pp. 572–73.
 Nietzsche 1888d, Why I Am a Destiny, §3.
 Nietzsche 1888c, pp. 4, 8, 18, 29, 37, 40, 51, 57, 59.
 Sedgwick 2009, p. 69.
 Zev Golan, "Nietzsche: Anti- or Philo-Semite? An Examination of His Books," in God, Man and Nietzsche, iUniverse, 2008 edition.
 Sedgwick 2009, p. 68.
 Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm. Human, All Too Human: A Book for Free Spirits, Univ. of Nebraska Press (1986) p. 231
 Morgan, George Allen (1941). What Nietzsche Means. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. p. 36. ISBN 978-0-8371-7404-4.
 Heidegger, p. 61.
 This "will to nothingness" is still a willing of some sort, because it is exactly as a pessimist that Schopenhauer clings to life. See F. Nietzsche, On the Genealogy of Morals, III:7
 F. Nietzsche, KSA 12:7 [8]
 Friedrich Nietzsche, Complete Works Vol. 13.
 Nietzsche 1886, p. 13.
 Nietzsche 1882, p. 349.
 Nietzsche 1887, p. II:12.
 Nietzsche 1888b, Skirmishes of an untimely man, §14.
 Brian Leiter, Routledge guide to Nietzsche on morality, p. 121
 Nietzsche 1888c, §2.
 Nietzsche 1886, I, §36.
 Nietzsche comments in many notes about matter being a hypothesis drawn from the metaphysics of substance: G. Whitlock, "Roger Boscovich, Benedict de Spinoza and Friedrich Nietzsche: The Untold Story", Nietzsche-Studien 25, 1996, p. 207.
 Nietzsche 1886, I, §12.
 Deleuze 2006, p. 46.
 Nietzsche 1886, I, §22.
 Leddy, Thomas (2006-06-14). "Project MUSE – Nietzsche's Mirror: The World as Will to Power (review)". The Journal of Nietzsche Studies. 31 (1): 66–68. doi:10.1353/nie.2006.0006. Retrieved 22 August 2014.
 Nietzsche 1961, pp. 176–80.
 Kundera, Milan (1999), The Unbearable Lightness of Being, p. 5
 Dudley, Will (2002). Hegel, Nietzsche, and Philosophy: Thinking Freedom. p. 201. ISBN 978-0-521-81250-4.
 See Heidegger, Nietzsche. Volume II: The Eternal Recurrence of the Same trans. David Farrell Krell. New York: Harper and Row, 1984. 25.
 Kaufmann, Friedrich Nietzsche. Transl., with comm., by Walter (1974). The Gay Science with a Prelude in Rhymes and an Appendix of Songs ([1st ed.] ed.). New York: Vintage Books. p. 16. ISBN 978-0-394-71985-6.
 Paul Van Tongeren (2000). Reinterpreting Modern Culture: An Introduction to Friedrich Nietzsche's Philosophy. Purdue University Press. p. 295. ISBN 978-1-55753-157-5. Retrieved 18 April 2013.
 Nietzsche, Friedrich (1954). The Portable Nietzsche. trans. Walter Kaufmann. New York: Penguin.
 Nietzsche, Friedrich (2006). Nietzsche: Thus Spoke Zarathustra. ed. Adrian Del Caro and Robert Pippin. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-60261-7.
 Lampert, Laurence (1986). Nietzsche's Teaching. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
 Rosen, Stanley (1995). The Mask of Enlightenment. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 Lampert 1986, p. 18.
 Philosophy 302: Ethics Nietzsche, "Slave and Master Morality".
 Thus Spoke Zarathustra themes.
 Nietzsche and Heidegger. Archived from the original on 7 June 2012.
 Golomb, Jacob and Robert S. Wistrich (eds.), 2002, Nietzsche, Godfather of Fascism?: On the Uses and Abuses of a Philosophy. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
 Keith Ansell-Pearson, An Introduction to Nietzsche as Political Thinker: The Perfect Nihilist, Cambridge University Press, 1994, pp 33–34.
 Cite error: The named reference Bataille was invoked but never defined (see the help page).
 March 29, 1887 letter to Theodor Fritsch (in English)
 Kellner, Douglas (1999). "Nietzsche's Critique of Mass Culture". International Studies in Philosophy. 31 (3): 77–89. doi:10.5840/intstudphil199931353.
 Brobjer, Thomas. "Nietzsche's Reading and Private Library, 1885–1889." Published in Journal of History of Ideas.
 Letter to Franz Overbeck, 30 July 1881
 Russell 2004, pp. 693–97.
 Joudrey, Thomas J. (2017). "The Defects of Perfectionism: Nietzsche, Eliot, and the Irrevocability of Wrong". Philological Quarterly (96.1): 77–104.
 Nietzsche 2001, p. xxxvii.
 Roochnik 2004, pp. 37–39.
 Roochnik 2004, p. 48.
 Santayana 1916, p. 114.
 Brendan Donnellan, "Nietzsche and La Rochefoucauld" in The German Quarterly, Vol. 52, No. 3 (May 1979), pp. 303–18
 Nietzsche 1888d, "Why I am So Clever", §3.
 Johan Grzelczyk, "Féré et Nietzsche: au sujet de la décadence" Archived 16 November 2006 at the Wayback Machine, HyperNietzsche, 1 November 2005 (in French). Grzelczyk quotes Jacques Le Rider, Nietzsche en France. De la fin du XIXe siècle au temps présent, Paris, PUF, 1999, pp. 8–9
 Johan Grzelczyk, "Féré et Nietzsche: au sujet de la décadence" Archived 16 November 2006 at the Wayback Machine, HyperNietzsche, 1 November 2005 (in French). Grzelczyk quotes B. Wahrig-Schmidt, "Irgendwie, jedenfalls physiologisch. Friedrich Nietzsche, Alexandre Herzen (fils) und Charles Féré 1888" in Nietzsche Studien, Band 17, Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1988, p. 439
 Thomas, Brobjer (2010). Nietzsche's Philosophical Context: An Intellectual Biography. ISBN 978-0-252-09062-2.
 Note sur Nietzsche et Lange: "Le retour éternel", Albert Fouillée, Revue philosophique de la France et de l'étranger. An. 34. Paris 1909. T. 67, S. 519–25 (on French Wikisource)
 Walter Kaufmann, intr. p. 11 of his transl. of 'The Gay Science'
 Notebooks, cf. The Gay Science, Walter Kaufmann transl, p. 12
 Weaver, Santaniello (1994). Nietzsche, God, and the Jews: His Critique of Judeo-Christianity in Relation to the Nazi Myth. ISBN 978-0-7914-2136-9.
 Mazzino Montinari, "La Volonté de puissance" n'existe pas, Éditions de l'Éclat, 1996, §13
 Kaufmann 1974, pp. 306–40.
 Nietzsche 1888b, §45.
 Karl Löwith, From Hegel to Nietzsche, New York, 1964, p. 187.
 S. Taylor, Left Wing Nietzscheans, The Politics of German Expressionism 1910–1920, Walter de Gruyter, Berlin/New York, 1990, p. 144.
 G. Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy (transl. Hugh Tomlinson), 2006, pp. 153–54.
 R.C. Solomon & K.M. Higgins, The Age of German Idealism, Routledge, 1993, p. 300.
 R.A. Samek, The Meta Phenomenon, New York, 1981, p. 70.
 T. Goyens, Beer and Revolution: The German Anarchist Movement in New York City, Illinois, 2007, p. 197.
 Laska, Bernd A. "Nietzsche's initial crisis". Germanic Notes and Reviews. 33 (2): 109–33.
 Liukkonen, Petri. "Friedrich Hölderlin". Books and Writers (kirjasto.sci.fi). Finland: Kuusankoski Public Library. Archived from the original on 26 December 2014.
 Meyer-Sickendiek, Burkhard, "Nietzsche's Aesthetic Solution to the Problem of Epigonism in the Nineteenth Century", ed. Paul Bishop, Nietzsche and Antiquity: His Reaction and Response to the Classical Tradition, Woodbridge, UK: Boydell & Brewer, 2004. p. 323
 Rebekah, Peery (2008). Nietzsche, Philosopher of the Perilous Perhaps. ISBN 978-0-87586-644-4.
 See 1910 article from the Encyclopædia Britannica
 O. Ewald, "German Philosophy in 1907", in The Philosophical Review, Vol. 17, No. 4, July 1908, pp. 400–26.
 T.A. Riley, "Anti-Statism in German Literature, as Exemplified by the Work of John Henry Mackay", in PMLA, Vol. 62, No. 3, September 1947, pp. 828–43.
 C.E. Forth, "Nietzsche, Decadence, and Regeneration in France, 1891–1895", in Journal of the History of Ideas, Vol. 54, No. 1, January 1993, pp. 97–117.
 Mencken, H.L. (1910). The Gist of Nietzsche. Boston, J.W. Luce & company.
 Expressionism.
 Postmodernism, Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2015
 Coste, Bénédicte (15 December 2016). "The Romantics of 1909: Arthur Symons, Pierre Lasserre and T.E. Hulme". E-rea (14.1). doi:10.4000/erea.5609. ISSN 1638-1718.
 Everdell, William (1998). The First Moderns. Chicago: U Chicago Press. p. 508. ISBN 978-0-226-22481-7.
 Joyce and Nietzsche. Archived from the original on 12 June 2011.
 Pasley, Malcolm (1978). Nietzsche:Imagery and thoughts. ISBN 978-0-520-03577-5.
 Forrester, John (1997). Dispatches from the Freud Wars. ISBN 978-0-674-53960-0.
 Argyle, Gisela (2002). Germany as model and monster: Allusions in English fiction. ISBN 978-0-7735-2351-7.
 The Double Man.
 Donald, Mitchell (1980). Gustav Mahler: The Early Years. ISBN 978-0-520-04141-7.
 James, Wood (1998-11-26). "Addicted to Unpredictability". London Review of Books. pp. 16–19.
 Reesman, Jeanne Campbell (15 March 2011). Jack London's Racial Lives. ISBN 978-0-8203-3970-2.
 London, Jack (2001). A Sun of the Son. ISBN 978-0-8061-3362-1.
 Ray, Jackson (2007). Nietzsche and Islam. ISBN 978-1-134-20500-4.
 Poets of Cambridge. Archived from the original on 29 April 2012.
 Wallace Stevens' Harmonium.
 Serio, John N (2007). The Cambridge Companion to Wallace Stevens. ISBN 978-1-139-82754-6.
 Olaf Stapleton. Archived from the original on 17 July 2009. Retrieved 22 December 2018.
 Brad, Damare. Music and Literature in Silver Age Russia: Mikhail Kuzmin and Alexander Scriabin. ISBN 978-0-549-81910-3.
 Bernice, Rosenthal (2010). New Myth, New World: From Nietzsche to Stalinism. ISBN 978-0-271-04658-7.
 Bernice, Rosenthal (1994). Nietzsche and Soviet Culture: Ally and Adversary. ISBN 978-0-521-45281-6.
 Shookman, Ellis (2004). Thomas Mann's Death in Venice. ISBN 978-0-313-31159-8.
 Nietzsche Circle. Archived from the original on 23 January 2013.
 Mann, Thomas:Doctor Faustus.
 Nietzsche, Friedrich: Also Sprach Zarathustra.
 Aschheim, Steven E. (1992), The Nietzsche Legacy in Germany, 1890–1990, Berkeley and Los Angeles, p. 135, [a]bout 150,000 copies of a specially durable wartime Zarathustra were distributed to the troops
 Kaufmann 1974, p. 8.
 Schrift, A.D. (1995). Nietzsche's French Legacy: A Genealogy of Poststructuralism. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-91147-8.
 Jacob, Golomb (2004). Nietzsche and Zion. Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-0-8014-3762-5.
 Jacob, Golomb. Nietzsche and Zion.
 Ohana, David (2012). The Origins of Israeli Mythology: Neither Canaanites nor Crusaders. ISBN 978-1-139-50520-8.
 Golomb 1997, pp. 234–35.
 Walter, Kaufmann (2008). Nietzsche: Philosopher, Psychologist, Antichrist. ISBN 978-1-4008-2016-0.
 Zev Golan, God, Man and Nietzsche, iUniverse, 2007, p. 169: "It would be most useful if our youth climbed, even if only briefly, to Zarathustra's heights..."
 Press, Cambridge University (1998). The Cambridge Companion to Eugene O'Neill. ISBN 978-0-521-55645-3.
 Postomodern considerations of Nietzschean perspectivism.[dead link]
 Diggins, John Patrick (2008). Eugene O'Neill's America: Desire Under Democracy. ISBN 978-0-226-14882-3.
 Törnqvist, Egil (2004). Eugene O'Neill:A Playwright's theatre. ISBN 978-0-7864-1713-1.
 Adorno, Theodor.
 Arthur, Herman (2010). The Idea of Decline in Western History. ISBN 978-1-4516-0313-2.
 "We know, from his [Hitler's] secretary, that he could quote Schopenhauer by the page, and the other German philosopher of willpower, Nietzsche, whose works he afterwards presented to Mussolini, was often on his lips." Trevor Roper, H. The Mind of Adolf Hitler, p. xxxvii. Introductory essay for Hitler's Table Talk 1941–1944 Secret Conversations. Enigma Books (2008)
 "'Landsberg,' Hitler told Hans Frank, was his 'university paid for by the state.' He read, he said, everything he could get hold of: Nietzsche, Houston Stewart Chamberlain, Ranke, Treitschke, Marx, Bismarck's Thoughts and Memories, and the war memoirs of German and allied generals and statesmen....But Hitler's reading and reflection were anything but academic, doubtless he did read much. However, as was noted in an earlier chapter, he made clear in My Struggle that reading for him had purely an instrumental purpose. He read not for knowledge or enlightenment, but for confirmation of his own preconceptions." Kershaw, Ian Hitler: Hubris 1889–1936. W.W. Norton p. 240
 Weaver Santaniello, Nietzsche, God, and the Jews, SUNY Press, 1994, p. 41: "Hitler probably never read a word of Nietzsche."
 Berel Lang, Post-Holocaust: Interpretation, Misinterpretation, and the Claims of History, Indiana University Press, 2005, p. 162: "Arguably, Hitler himself never read a word of Nietzsche; certainly, if he did read him, it was not extensively."
 William L. Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich: A History of Nazi Germany, Touchstone, 1959, pp. 100–01
 Simonetta Falasca-Zamponi, Fascist Spectacle: The Aesthetics of Power in Mussolini's Italy, University of California Press, 2000, p. 44: "In 1908 he presented his conception of the superman's role in modern society in a writing on Nietzsche titled "The Philosophy of Force."
 Philip Morgan, Fascism in Europe, 1919–1945, Routledge, 2003, p. 21: "We know that Mussolini had read Nietzsche"
 J.L. Gaddis, P.H. Gordon, E.R. May, J. Rosenberg, Cold War Statesmen Confront the Bomb, Oxford University Press, 1999, p. 217: "The son of a history teacher, de Gaulle read voraciously as a boy and young man—Jacques Bainville, Henri Bergson, Friederich [sic] Nietzsche, Maurice Barres—and was steeped in conservative French historical and philosophical traditions."
 Mumia, Abu-Jamal (2004). We Want Freedom: A Life in the Black Panther Party. ISBN 978-0-89608-718-7.
 Crowley, Monica (1998), Nixon in Winter, IB Tauris, p. 351, He read with curious interest the writings of Friedrich Nietzsche [...] Nixon asked to borrow my copy of Beyond Good and Evil, a title that inspired the title of his final book, Beyond Peace.
 Lev, Shestov. Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, and Nietzsche. ISBN 978-0-8214-0053-1.
 Stefan, Sorgner. Nietzsche & Germany.
 Rickman, Hans Peter (1996). Philosophy in Literature. ISBN 978-0-8386-3652-7.
 Oswald Spengler. Archived from the original on 20 May 2013.
 George Grant.
 Tat, Alin; Popenici, Stefan (2008). Romanian Philosophical Culture, Globalization, and Education. ISBN 978-1-56518-242-4.
 The Transformation of Nietzschean Ideas in The Fountainhead.
 Lampert, Laurence (1996). Leo Strauss and Nietzsche. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
 Cornwell, Neil (2006). The Absurd in Literature. ISBN 978-0-7190-7410-3.
 Ricœur, Paul (1970). Freud and Philosophy: An Essay on Interpretation. New Haven and London: Yale University Press. p. 32. ISBN 978-0-300-02189-9.
 "Jarrett, J.L., ed.: Jung's Seminar on Nietzsche's Zarathustra: (Abridged edition) (paperback)". Press.princeton.edu. Retrieved 22 August 2014.
 "Jung's Reception of Friedrich Nietzsche: A Roadmap for the Uninitiated by Dr. Ritske Rensma". Depth Insights. Retrieved 22 August 2014.
 Raymond A. Belliotti, Jesus or Nietzsche: How Should We Live Our Lives? (Rodopi, 2013).
 Ronald A. Kuipers, "Turning Memory into Prophecy: Roberto Unger and Paul Ricoeur on the Human Condition Between Past and Future," The Heythrop Journal (2011): 1–10.
 Richard Rorty, "Unger, Castoriadis, and the Romance of a National Future," Northwestern University Law Review 82 (1988 1987): 39.
Works cited
Cate, Curtis (2005). Friedrich Nietzsche. Woodstock, NY: The Overlook Press.
Deleuze, Gilles (2006) [1983]. Nietzsche and Philosophy. trans. Hugh Tomlinson. Athlone Press. ISBN 978-0-485-11233-7.
Golomb, Jacob, ed. (1997). Nietzsche and Jewish culture. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-09512-9.
Heidegger, Martin. The Word of Nietzsche.
Hollingdale, R.J. (1999). Nietzsche: The Man and His Philosophy. Cambridge University Press. p. 270. ISBN 978-0-521-64091-6. JSTOR 2024055.
Kaufmann, Walter (1974). Nietzsche: Philosopher, Psychologist, Antichrist. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-01983-3.
Lampert, Laurence (1986). Nietzsche's Teaching: An Interpretation of "Thus Spoke Zarathustra". New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-04430-0.
Roochnik, David (2004). Retrieving the Ancients.
Russell, Bertrand (2004). A History of Western Philosophy. Routledge.
Santayana, George (1916). "XI". Egotism in German Philosophy. London & Toronto: JM Dent & Sons.
Sedgwick, Peter R (2009). Nietzsche: the key concepts. Routledge, Oxon, England: Routledge.
Higgins, Kathleen (2000). What Nietzsche Really Said. University of Texas, Austin, Texas: Random House, NY.
Further reading
Arena, Leonardo Vittorio (2012), Nietzsche in China in the XXth Century, ebook
Babich, Babette E. (1994), Nietzsche's Philosophy of Science, Albany: State University of New York Press.
Baird, Forrest E; Walter Kaufmann (2008), From Plato to Derrida, Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall, pp. 1011–38, ISBN 978-0-13-158591-1
Benson, Bruce Ellis (2007). Pious Nietzsche: Decadence and Dionysian Faith. Indiana University Press. p. 296.
Breitschmid, Markus, Der bauende Geist. Friedrich Nietzsche und die Architektur. Lucerne: Quart Verlag, 2001, ISBN 3-907631-23-4
Breitschmid, Markus, Nietzsche's Denkraum. Zurich: Edition Didacta, 2006, Hardcover Edition: ISBN 978-3-033-01206-6; Paperback Edition: ISBN 978-3-033-01148-9
Brinton, Crane, Nietzsche. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1941; reprint with new preface, epilogue, and blbiography, New York: Harper Torchbooks/The Academy Library, 1965.)
Brunger, Jeremy. 2015. "Public Opinions, Private Laziness: The Epistemological Break in Nietzsche. Numero Cinq magazine (August).
Corriero, Emilio Carlo, Nietzsche oltre l'abisso. Declinazioni italiane della 'morte di Dio', Marco Valerio, Torino, 2007
Dod, Elmar, "Der unheimlichste Gast. Die Philosophie des Nihilismus". Marburg: Tectum Verlag 2013. ISBN 978-3-8288-3107-0
Eilon, Eli. Nietzsche's Principle of Abundance as Guiding Aesthetic Value. Nietzsche-Studien, December 2001 (30). pp. 200–21.
Gemes, Ken; May, Simon, eds. (2002). Nietzsche on Freedom and Autonomy. Oxford University Press..
Golan, Zev. God, Man and Nietzsche: A Startling Dialogue between Judaism and Modern Philosophers (iUniverse, 2007).
Hunt, Lester (2008). "Nietzsche, Friedrich (1844–1900)". In Hamowy, Ronald. The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; Cato Institute. pp. 355–56. doi:10.4135/9781412965811.n217. ISBN 978-1-4129-6580-4. LCCN 2008009151. OCLC 750831024.
Huskinson, Lucy. "Nietzsche and Jung: The whole self in the union of opposites" (London and New York: Routledge, 2004)
Kaplama, Erman. Cosmological Aesthetics through the Kantian Sublime and Nietzschean Dionysian. Lanham: UPA, Rowman & Littlefield, 2014.
Kopić, Mario, S Nietzscheom o Europi, Jesenski i Turk, Zagreb, 2001 ISBN 978-953-222-016-2
Luchte, James (2008). Nietzsche's Thus Spoke Zarathustra: Before Sunrise. London: Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4411-1653-6..
Magnus and Higgins, "Nietzsche's works and their themes", in The Cambridge Companion to Nietzsche, Magnus and Higgins (ed.), University of Cambridge Press, 1996, pp. 21–58. ISBN 0-521-36767-0
O'Flaherty, James C., Sellner, Timothy F., Helm, Robert M., "Studies in Nietzsche and the Classical Tradition" (University of North Carolina Press) 1979 ISBN 0-8078-8085-X
O'Flaherty, James C., Sellner, Timothy F., Helm, Robert M., "Studies in Nietzsche and the Judaeo-Christian Tradition" (University of North Carolina Press) 1985 ISBN 0-8078-8104-X
Owen, David. Nietzsche, Politics & Modernity (London: Sage Publications, 1995).
Pérez, Rolando. Towards a Genealogy of the Gay Science: From Toulouse and Barcelona to Nietzsche and Beyond. eHumanista/IVITRA. Volume 5, 2014. https://web.archive.org/web/20140924114053/http://www.ehumanista.ucsb.edu/eHumanista%20IVITRA/Volume%205/Volum%20Regular/7_Perez.pdf
Porter, James I. "Nietzsche and the Philology of the Future" (Stanford University Press, 2000). ISBN 0-8047-3698-7
Emilio Carlo Corriero, "Nietzsche's Death of God and Italian Philosophy". Preface by Gianni Vattimo, Rowman & Littlefield, London – New York, 2016
Porter, James I (2000). The Invention of Dionysus: An Essay on The Birth of Tragedy. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-3700-5..
Ratner-Rosenhagen, Jennifer (2011), American Nietzsche: A History of an Icon and His Ideas. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ruehl, Martin (2 January 2018). "In defence of slavery: Nietzsche's Dangerous Thinking". The Independent. Retrieved 18 August 2018.
Seung, T.K. Nietzsche's Epic of the Soul: Thus Spoke Zarathustra. Lanham, Maryland: Lexington Books, 2005. ISBN 0-7391-1130-2
Shapiro, Gary (2003). Archaeologies of Vision: Foucault and Nietzsche on Seeing and Saying. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-75047-7.
Shapiro, Gary (2016). Nietzsche's Earth: Great Events, Great Politics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-39445-9.
Shapiro, Gary (1991). Alcyone: Nietzsche on Gifts, Noise, and Women. Albany: SUNY Press. ISBN 978-0-7914-0742-4.
Tanner, Michael (1994). Nietzsche. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-287680-5.
von Vacano, Diego (2007). The Art of Power: Machiavelli, Nietzsche and the Making of Aesthetic Political Theory. Lanham, MD: Lexington..
Waite, Geoff. (1996), Nietzsche's Corps/e: Aesthetics, Prophecy, Politics, or, The Spectacular Technoculture of Everyday Life, Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Wicks, Robert. "Friedrich Nietzsche". In Edward N. Zalta. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2004 ed.).
Young, Julian. Friedrich Nietzsche: A Philosophical Biography (Cambridge University Press; 2010) 649 pp.
External links
Friedrich Nietzsche
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from Wikimedia Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Resources from Wikiversity
Entry on Nietzsche at the Encyclopædia Britannica
Nietzsche's brief autobiography
Works by Friedrich Nietzsche at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Friedrich Nietzsche at Internet Archive
Works by Friedrich Nietzsche at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Publications by and about Friedrich Nietzsche in the catalogue Helveticat of the Swiss National Library
Wilkerson, Dale. "Friedrich Nietzsche". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Jensen, Anthony K. "Nietzsche's Philosophy of History". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Wicks, Robert (14 November 2007). "Friedrich Nietzsche". In Zalta, Edward N. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Leiter, Brian (27 July 2007). "Nietzsche's Moral and Political Philosophy". In Zalta, Edward N. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Nietzsche Source: Digital version of the German critical edition of the complete works and Digital facsimile edition of the entire Nietzsche estate
Lexido: Searchable Database index of Public Domain editions of all Nietzsche's major works
Friedrich Nietzsche at Curlie
Free scores by Friedrich Nietzsche at the International Music Score Library Project (IMSLP)
Timeline of German Philosophers
Walter Kaufmann 1960 Prof. Nietzsche and the Crisis in Philosophy Audio
Kierans, Kenneth (2010). "On the Unity of Nietzsche's Philosophy" (PDF). Animus. 14. ISSN 1209-0689. Retrieved 17 August 2011.
Brian Leiter's Nietzsche Blog: News, polls, and discussion about Nietzsche and current events in Nietzsche scholarship from Brian Leiter (University of Chicago).
Burkhart Brückner, Robin Pape: Biography of Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche in: Biographical Archive of Psychiatry (BIAPSY).
Newspaper clippings about Friedrich Nietzsche in the 20th Century Press Archives of the German National Library of Economics (ZBW)
Rick Roderick (1991) Nietzsche and the Postmodern Condition (1991) Video Lectures
vte
Friedrich Nietzsche
Works	
The Birth of Tragedy On the Pathos of Truth Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks On Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral Sense Untimely Meditations Hymnus an das Leben Human, All Too Human The Dawn of Day Idylls from Messina The Gay Science Thus Spoke Zarathustra Beyond Good and Evil On the Genealogy of Morality The Case of Wagner Twilight of the Idols The Antichrist Ecce Homo Dionysian-Dithyrambs Nietzsche contra Wagner The Will to Power (posthumous)
Concepts and
philosophy	
Amor fati Apollonian and Dionysian Eternal return Faith in the Earth God is dead Herd instinct Last man Master–slave morality Nietzschean affirmation Perspectivism Ressentiment Transvaluation of values Tschandala Übermensch Will to power World riddle
Related	
Works about Nietzsche Influence and reception of Nietzsche Anarchism and Nietzsche Nietzsche's views on women Nietzsche and free will The Journal of Nietzsche Studies Library of Friedrich Nietzsche Nietzsche Archive Nietzsche and Asian Thought Nietzsche Archive Nietzsche-Haus, Naumburg Nietzsche-Haus, Sils Maria Relationship with Max Stirner My Sister and I Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche (sister) When Nietzsche Wept (novel film)
Articles related to Friedrich Nietzsche
Authority control Edit this at Wikidata	
BIBSYS: 90051300 BNE: XX905825 BNF: cb11917712p (data) GND: 118587943 HDS: 11641 ISNI: 0000 0001 2282 8181 LCCN: n79021132 MusicBrainz: d20d70cd-db2d-476c-80f5-87ebfda2a850 NDL: 00451342 NKC: jn19990006124 NLA: 35471497 RKD: 439285 ICCU: IT\ICCU\CFIV\001040 SELIBR: 205999 SNAC: w6zk5h48 SUDOC: 086200038 ULAN: 500222156 VIAF: 89798474 WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 89798474
Categories: Friedrich Nietzsche1844 births1900 deaths19th-century atheists19th-century classical composers19th-century German journalists19th-century German composers19th-century German novelists19th-century German philosophersAnti-consumeristsAntitheistsAphoristsAtheism activistsAtheist existentialistsAtheist philosophersAtheist writersContinental philosophersCritical theoristsCritics of ChristianityCritics of religionsCultural criticsDeaths from pneumoniaDeterministsEpistemologistsExistentialistsFormer LutheransGerman atheism activistsGerman atheistsGerman classical composersGerman classical philologistsGerman-language poetsGerman male classical composersGerman male journalistsGerman military personnel of the Franco-Prussian WarGerman music criticsGerman philosophersGerman Romantic composersHellenistsIrony theoristsLeipzig University alumniMetaphysiciansOntologistsPeople from LützenPeople from the Province of SaxonyPhilosophers of artPhilosophers of culturePhilosophers of ethics and moralityPhilosophers of historyPhilosophers of literaturePhilosophers of mindPhilosophers of nihilismPhilosophers of religionPrussian Army personnelSocial commentatorsSocial criticsSocial philosophersStateless peopleUniversity of Basel facultyUniversity of Bonn alumniWriters from Saxony-Anhalt19th-century male musicians
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote
Wikisource
Languages
Afrikaans
Alemannisch
አማርኛ
Ænglisc
العربية
Aragonés
Asturianu
Avañe'ẽ
Azərbaycanca
تۆرکجه
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Башҡортса
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎
भोजपुरी
Български
Boarisch
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Буряад
Català
Чӑвашла
Čeština
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Emiliàn e rumagnòl
Español
Esperanto
Estremeñu
Euskara
فارسی
Fiji Hindi
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Galego
贛語
한국어
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
Kabɩyɛ
ქართული
Қазақша
Kiswahili
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî
Кыргызча
Кырык мары
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Лезги
Lietuvių
Limburgs
Livvinkarjala
Lumbaart
Magyar
Македонски
Malagasy
മലയാളം
Malti
मराठी
მარგალური
مصرى
مازِرونی
Bahasa Melayu
Mirandés
Монгол
Nederlands
Nedersaksies
नेपाली
日本語
Нохчийн
Nordfriisk
Norsk
Norsk nynorsk
Occitan
Oromoo
Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча
ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
Pangasinan
پنجابی
پښتو
Patois
Piemontèis
Polski
Português
Qaraqalpaqsha
Română
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
Русиньскый
Русский
Саха тыла
Gagana Samoa
Scots
Seeltersk
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
کوردی
Српски / srpski
Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
Taqbaylit
Татарча/tatarça
ไทย
ᏣᎳᎩ
Türkçe
Türkmençe
Тыва дыл
Українська
اردو
Vepsän kel’
Tiếng Việt
Volapük
Võro
Walon
文言
Winaray
吴语
ייִדיש
Yorùbá
粵語
Zazaki
Zeêuws
Žemaitėška
中文
Edit links
This page was last edited on 18 March 2019, at 10:37 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

 This is a good article. Follow the link for more information. Page semi-protected
Napoleon
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
This article is about Napoleon I. For other uses, see Napoleon (disambiguation).
"Napoleon Bonaparte" redirects here. For other uses, see Napoleon Bonaparte (disambiguation).
Napoleon
Portrait of Napoleon in his forties, in high-ranking white and dark blue military dress uniform. In the original image He stands amid rich 18th-century furniture laden with papers, and gazes at the viewer. His hair is Brutus style, cropped close but with a short fringe in front, and his right hand is tucked in his waistcoat.
The Emperor Napoleon in His Study at the Tuileries by Jacques-Louis David, 1812
Emperor of the French
1st reign	18 May 1804 – 6 April 1814
Coronation	2 December 1804
Notre-Dame Cathedral
Predecessor	Monarchy established
Successor	Louis XVIII as King
2nd reign	20 March 1815 – 22 June 1815
Predecessor	Louis XVIII
Successor	Louis XVIII
King of Italy
Reign	17 March 1805 – 11 April 1814
Coronation	26 May 1805
Milan Cathedral
Predecessor	Himself as President
Successor	Monarchy abolished
Protector of the
Confederation of the Rhine
In office
12 July 1806 – 19 October 1813
Predecessor	Office established
(partly Francis II as Holy Roman Emperor)
Successor	Office abolished
(partly Francis I as President of the German Confederation)
President of the Italian Republic
In office
26 January 1802 – 17 March 1805
Predecessor	Office established
(partly Francesco Melzi d'Eril as First Director)
Successor	Himself as King
First Consul of France
In office
10 November 1799 – 18 May 1804
Serving with Jean Jacques Régis and Charles-François Lebrun
Predecessor	French Directory
Successor	Himself as Emperor
More...
Born	15 August 1769
Ajaccio, Corsica, France
Died	5 May 1821 (aged 51)
Longwood, Saint Helena, United Kingdom
Burial	Les Invalides, Paris, France
Spouse	Joséphine de Beauharnais
(m. 1796; div. 1810)
Marie Louise of Austria (m. 1810)
Issue
Detail	Napoleon II
Full name
Napoléon Bonaparte
House	Bonaparte
Father	Carlo Buonaparte
Mother	Letizia Ramolino
Religion	see religion section
Signature


Coat of arms	Firma Napoleón Bonaparte.svg
Grandes Armes Impériales (1804-1815)2.svg
Napoléon Bonaparte (/nəˈpoʊliən ˈboʊnəpɑːrt/,[1] French: [napɔleɔ̃ bɔnɑpaʁt]; Italian: Napoleone Buonaparte; 15 August 1769 – 5 May 1821) was a French statesman and military leader who rose to prominence during the French Revolution and led several successful campaigns during the French Revolutionary Wars. He was Emperor of the French as Napoleon I from 1804 until 1814 and again briefly in 1815 during the Hundred Days. Napoleon dominated European and global affairs for more than a decade while leading France against a series of coalitions in the Napoleonic Wars. He won most of these wars and the vast majority of his battles, building a large empire that ruled over much of continental Europe before its final collapse in 1815. He is considered one of the greatest commanders in history, and his wars and campaigns are studied at military schools worldwide. Napoleon's political and cultural legacy has endured as one of the most celebrated and controversial leaders in human history.[2][3]

He was born Napoleone di Buonaparte (Italian: [napoleˈoːne di ˌbwɔnaˈparte]) in Corsica to a relatively modest family of Italian origin from minor nobility. He was serving as an artillery officer in the French army when the French Revolution erupted in 1789. He rapidly rose through the ranks of the military, seizing the new opportunities presented by the Revolution and becoming a general at age 24. The French Directory eventually gave him command of the Army of Italy after he suppressed a revolt against the government from royalist insurgents. At age 26, he began his first military campaign against the Austrians and the Italian monarchs aligned with the Habsburgs—winning virtually every battle, conquering the Italian Peninsula in a year while establishing "sister republics" with local support, and becoming a war hero in France. In 1798, he led a military expedition to Egypt that served as a springboard to political power. He orchestrated a coup in November 1799 and became First Consul of the Republic.

Napoleon's ambition and public approval inspired him to go further, and he became the first Emperor of the French in 1804. Intractable differences with the British meant that the French were facing a Third Coalition by 1805. Napoleon shattered this coalition with decisive victories in the Ulm Campaign and a historic triumph over the Russian Empire and Austrian Empire at the Battle of Austerlitz which led to the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire. In 1806, the Fourth Coalition took up arms against him because Prussia became worried about growing French influence on the continent. Napoleon quickly defeated Prussia at the battles of Jena and Auerstedt, then marched his Grande Armée deep into Eastern Europe and annihilated the Russians in June 1807 at the Battle of Friedland. France then forced the defeated nations of the Fourth Coalition to sign the Treaties of Tilsit in July 1807, bringing an uneasy peace to the continent. Tilsit signified the high-water mark of the French Empire. In 1809, the Austrians and the British challenged the French again during the War of the Fifth Coalition, but Napoleon solidified his grip over Europe after triumphing at the Battle of Wagram in July.

Napoleon then invaded the Iberian Peninsula, hoping to extend the Continental System and choke off British trade with the European mainland, and declared his brother Joseph Bonaparte the King of Spain in 1808. The Spanish and the Portuguese revolted with British support. The Peninsular War lasted six years, featured extensive guerrilla warfare, and ended in victory for the Allies against Napoleon. The Continental System caused recurring diplomatic conflicts between France and its client states, especially Russia. The Russians were unwilling to bear the economic consequences of reduced trade and routinely violated the Continental System, enticing Napoleon into another war. The French launched a major invasion of Russia in the summer of 1812. The campaign destroyed Russian cities, but did not yield the decisive victory Napoleon wanted. It resulted in the collapse of the Grande Armée and inspired a renewed push against Napoleon by his enemies. In 1813, Prussia and Austria joined Russian forces in the War of the Sixth Coalition against France. A lengthy military campaign culminated in a large Allied army defeating Napoleon at the Battle of Leipzig in October 1813, but his tactical victory at the minor Battle of Hanau allowed retreat onto French soil. The Allies then invaded France and captured Paris in the spring of 1814, forcing Napoleon to abdicate in April. He was exiled to the island of Elba off the coast of Tuscany, and the Bourbon dynasty was restored to power. Napoleon escaped from Elba in February 1815 and took control of France once again. The Allies responded by forming a Seventh Coalition which defeated him at the Battle of Waterloo in June. The British exiled him to the remote island of Saint Helena in the South Atlantic, where he died six years later at the age of 51.

Napoleon's influence on the modern world brought liberal reforms to the numerous territories that he conquered and controlled, such as the Low Countries, Switzerland, and large parts of modern Italy and Germany. He implemented fundamental liberal policies in France and throughout Western Europe.[note 1] His Napoleonic Code has influenced the legal systems of more than 70 nations around the world. British historian Andrew Roberts states: "The ideas that underpin our modern world—meritocracy, equality before the law, property rights, religious toleration, modern secular education, sound finances, and so on—were championed, consolidated, codified and geographically extended by Napoleon. To them he added a rational and efficient local administration, an end to rural banditry, the encouragement of science and the arts, the abolition of feudalism and the greatest codification of laws since the fall of the Roman Empire".[10]


Contents
1	Early life
2	Early career
2.1	Siege of Toulon
2.2	13 Vendémiaire
2.3	First Italian campaign
2.4	Egyptian expedition
3	Ruler of France
3.1	French Consulate
3.1.1	Temporary peace in Europe
3.2	French Empire
3.2.1	War of the Third Coalition
3.2.2	Middle-Eastern alliances
3.2.3	War of the Fourth Coalition and Tilsit
3.2.4	Peninsular War and Erfurt
3.2.5	War of the Fifth Coalition and Marie Louise
3.2.6	Invasion of Russia
3.2.7	War of the Sixth Coalition
3.2.8	Exile to Elba
3.2.9	Hundred Days
4	Exile on Saint Helena
4.1	Death
4.1.1	Cause of death
5	Religion
5.1	Concordat
5.2	Arrest of Pope Pius VII
5.3	Religious emancipation
6	Personality
7	Image
8	Reforms
8.1	Napoleonic Code
8.2	Warfare
8.3	Metric system
8.4	Education
9	Memory and evaluation
9.1	Criticism
9.2	Propaganda and memory
9.3	Long-term influence outside France
10	Marriages and children
11	Titles, styles, honours, and arms
12	Ancestry
13	See also
14	Notes
15	Citations
16	References
16.1	Biographical studies
16.2	Primary sources
16.3	Specialty studies
16.4	Historiography and memory
17	External links
Early life
Half-length portrait of a wigged middle-aged man with a well-to-do jacket. His left hand is tucked inside his waistcoat.
Napoleon's father, Italian nobleman Carlo Buonaparte, was Corsica's representative to the court of Louis XVI.
The ancestors of Napoleon descended from minor Italian nobility of Tuscan origin who had come to Corsica from Liguria in the 16th century.[11][12] His parents Carlo Maria di Buonaparte and Maria Letizia Ramolino maintained an ancestral home called "Casa Buonaparte" in Ajaccio. Napoleon was born there on 15 August 1769, their fourth child and third son. A boy and girl were born first but died in infancy. He had an elder brother, Joseph, and younger siblings Lucien, Elisa, Louis, Pauline, Caroline, and Jérôme. Napoleon was baptised as a Catholic.[13] Although he was born Napoleone di Buonaparte,[14] he changed his name to Napoléon Bonaparte when he was 27 in 1796 upon his first marriage.[note 2]

Napoleon was born the same year the Republic of Genoa, a former commune of Italy,[18] transferred Corsica to France.[19] The state sold sovereign rights a year before his birth in 1768, and the island was conquered by France during the year of his birth and formally incorporated as a province in 1770, after 500 years under Genoese rule and 14 years of independence.[note 3] Napoleon's parents fought to maintain independence even when Maria was pregnant with him. His father was an attorney who went on to be named Corsica's representative to the court of Louis XVI in 1777.[23]

The dominant influence of Napoleon's childhood was his mother, whose firm discipline restrained a rambunctious child.[24] Later in life Napoleon stated, "The future destiny of the child is always the work of the mother."[25] Napoleon's maternal grandmother had married into the Swiss Fesch family in her second marriage, and Napoleon's uncle, the cardinal Joseph Fesch, would fulfill a role as protector of the Bonaparte family for some years. Napoleon's noble, moderately affluent background afforded him greater opportunities to study than were available to a typical Corsican of the time.[26]

When he turned 9 years old,[27][28] he moved to the French mainland and enrolled at a religious school in Autun in January 1779. In May, he transferred with a scholarship to a military academy at Brienne-le-Château.[29] In his youth he was an outspoken Corsican nationalist and supported the state's independence from France.[27] Like many Corsicans, Napoleon spoke and read Corsican (as his mother tongue) and Italian (as the official language of Corsica).[30][31][32] He began learning French in school at around age 10.[33] Although he became fluent in French, he spoke with a distinctive Corsican accent and never learned how to spell French correctly.[34]

Napoleon was routinely bullied by his peers for his accent, birthplace, short stature, mannerisms and inability to speak French quickly.[31] Bonaparte became reserved and melancholy applying himself to reading. An examiner observed that Napoleon "has always been distinguished for his application in mathematics. He is fairly well acquainted with history and geography ... This boy would make an excellent sailor".[note 4][36] In early adulthood, he briefly intended to become a writer; he authored a history of Corsica and a romantic novella.[27]

On completion of his studies at Brienne in 1784, Napoleon was admitted to the École Militaire in Paris. He trained to become an artillery officer and, when his father's death reduced his income, was forced to complete the two-year course in one year.[37] He was the first Corsican to graduate from the École Militaire.[37] He was examined by the famed scientist Pierre-Simon Laplace.[38]

Early career

Napoleon Bonaparte, aged 23, lieutenant-colonel of a battalion of Corsican Republican volunteers. Portrait by Henri Félix Emmanuel Philippoteaux.
Upon graduating in September 1785, Bonaparte was commissioned a second lieutenant in La Fère artillery regiment.[29][note 5] He served in Valence and Auxonne until after the outbreak of the Revolution in 1789, and took nearly two years' leave in Corsica and Paris during this period. At this time, he was a fervent Corsican nationalist, and wrote to Corsican leader Pasquale Paoli in May 1789, "As the nation was perishing I was born. Thirty thousand Frenchmen were vomited on to our shores, drowning the throne of liberty in waves of blood. Such was the odious sight which was the first to strike me".[40]

He spent the early years of the Revolution in Corsica, fighting in a complex three-way struggle among royalists, revolutionaries, and Corsican nationalists. He was a supporter of the republican Jacobin movement, organising clubs in Corsica,[41] and was given command over a battalion of volunteers. He was promoted to captain in the regular army in July 1792, despite exceeding his leave of absence and leading a riot against French troops.[42]

He came into conflict with Paoli, who had decided to split with France and sabotage the Corsican contribution to the Expédition de Sardaigne, by preventing a French assault on the Sardinian island of La Maddalena.[43] Bonaparte and his family fled to the French mainland in June 1793 because of the split with Paoli.[44]

Siege of Toulon
Main article: Siege of Toulon

Bonaparte at the Siege of Toulon
In July 1793, Bonaparte published a pro-republican pamphlet entitled Le souper de Beaucaire (Supper at Beaucaire) which gained him the support of Augustin Robespierre, younger brother of the Revolutionary leader Maximilien Robespierre. With the help of his fellow Corsican Antoine Christophe Saliceti, Bonaparte was appointed artillery commander of the republican forces at the Siege of Toulon.[45]

He adopted a plan to capture a hill where republican guns could dominate the city's harbour and force the British to evacuate. The assault on the position led to the capture of the city, but during it Bonaparte was wounded in the thigh. He was promoted to brigadier general at the age of 24. Catching the attention of the Committee of Public Safety, he was put in charge of the artillery of France's Army of Italy.[46]

Napoleon spent time as inspector of coastal fortifications on the Mediterranean coast near Marseille while he was waiting for confirmation of the Army of Italy post. He devised plans for attacking the Kingdom of Sardinia as part of France's campaign against the First Coalition. Augustin Robespierre and Saliceti were ready to listen to the freshly promoted artillery general.[47]

The French army carried out Bonaparte's plan in the Battle of Saorgio in April 1794, and then advanced to seize Ormea in the mountains. From Ormea, they headed west to outflank the Austro-Sardinian positions around Saorge. After this campaign, Augustin Robespierre sent Bonaparte on a mission to the Republic of Genoa to determine that country's intentions towards France.[48]

13 Vendémiaire
Main article: 13 Vendémiaire
Some contemporaries alleged that Bonaparte was put under house arrest at Nice for his association with the Robespierres following their fall in the Thermidorian Reaction in July 1794, but Napoleon's secretary Bourrienne disputed the allegation in his memoirs. According to Bourrienne, jealousy was responsible, between the Army of the Alps and the Army of Italy (with whom Napoleon was seconded at the time).[49] Bonaparte dispatched an impassioned defense in a letter to the commissar Saliceti, and he was subsequently acquitted of any wrongdoing.[50] He was released within two weeks and, due to his technical skills, was asked to draw up plans to attack Italian positions in the context of France's war with Austria. He also took part in an expedition to take back Corsica from the British, but the French were repulsed by the British Royal Navy.[51]

By 1795, Bonaparte had become engaged to Désirée Clary, daughter of François Clary. Désirée's sister Julie Clary had married Bonaparte's elder brother Joseph.[52] In April 1795, he was assigned to the Army of the West, which was engaged in the War in the Vendée—a civil war and royalist counter-revolution in Vendée, a region in west central France on the Atlantic Ocean. As an infantry command, it was a demotion from artillery general—for which the army already had a full quota—and he pleaded poor health to avoid the posting.[53]

Etching of a street, there are many pockets of smoke due to a group of republican artillery firing on royalists across the street at the entrance to a building
Journée du 13 Vendémiaire, artillery fire in front of the Church of Saint-Roch, Paris, Rue Saint-Honoré
He was moved to the Bureau of Topography of the Committee of Public Safety and sought unsuccessfully to be transferred to Constantinople in order to offer his services to the Sultan.[54] During this period, he wrote the romantic novella Clisson et Eugénie, about a soldier and his lover, in a clear parallel to Bonaparte's own relationship with Désirée.[55] On 15 September, Bonaparte was removed from the list of generals in regular service for his refusal to serve in the Vendée campaign. He faced a difficult financial situation and reduced career prospects.[56]

On 3 October, royalists in Paris declared a rebellion against the National Convention.[57] Paul Barras, a leader of the Thermidorian Reaction, knew of Bonaparte's military exploits at Toulon and gave him command of the improvised forces in defence of the Convention in the Tuileries Palace. Napoleon had seen the massacre of the King's Swiss Guard there three years earlier and realised that artillery would be the key to its defence.[29]

He ordered a young cavalry officer named Joachim Murat to seize large cannons and used them to repel the attackers on 5 October 1795—13 Vendémiaire An IV in the French Republican Calendar; 1,400 royalists died and the rest fled.[57] He had cleared the streets with "a whiff of grapeshot", according to 19th-century historian Thomas Carlyle in The French Revolution: A History.[58][59]

The defeat of the royalist insurrection extinguished the threat to the Convention and earned Bonaparte sudden fame, wealth, and the patronage of the new government, the Directory. Murat married one of Napoleon's sisters, becoming his brother-in-law; he also served under Napoleon as one of his generals. Bonaparte was promoted to Commander of the Interior and given command of the Army of Italy.[44]

Within weeks, he was romantically involved with Joséphine de Beauharnais, the former mistress of Barras. The couple married on 9 March 1796 in a civil ceremony.[60]

First Italian campaign
Main article: Italian campaigns of the French Revolutionary Wars
A three-quarter-length depiction of Bonaparte, with black tunic and leather gloves, holding a standard and sword, turning backwards to look at his troops
Bonaparte at the Pont d'Arcole, by Baron Antoine-Jean Gros, (c. 1801), Musée du Louvre, Paris
Two days after the marriage, Bonaparte left Paris to take command of the Army of Italy. He immediately went on the offensive, hoping to defeat the forces of Piedmont before their Austrian allies could intervene. In a series of rapid victories during the Montenotte Campaign, he knocked Piedmont out of the war in two weeks. The French then focused on the Austrians for the remainder of the war, the highlight of which became the protracted struggle for Mantua. The Austrians launched a series of offensives against the French to break the siege, but Napoleon defeated every relief effort, scoring victories at the battles of Castiglione, Bassano, Arcole, and Rivoli. The decisive French triumph at Rivoli in January 1797 led to the collapse of the Austrian position in Italy. At Rivoli, the Austrians lost up to 14,000 men while the French lost about 5,000.[61]

The next phase of the campaign featured the French invasion of the Habsburg heartlands. French forces in Southern Germany had been defeated by the Archduke Charles in 1796, but the Archduke withdrew his forces to protect Vienna after learning about Napoleon's assault. In the first encounter between the two commanders, Napoleon pushed back his opponent and advanced deep into Austrian territory after winning at the Battle of Tarvis in March 1797. The Austrians were alarmed by the French thrust that reached all the way to Leoben, about 100 km from Vienna, and finally decided to sue for peace.[62] The Treaty of Leoben, followed by the more comprehensive Treaty of Campo Formio, gave France control of most of northern Italy and the Low Countries, and a secret clause promised the Republic of Venice to Austria. Bonaparte marched on Venice and forced its surrender, ending 1,100 years of independence. He also authorized the French to loot treasures such as the Horses of Saint Mark.[63]


Bonaparte during the Italian campaign in 1797
His application of conventional military ideas to real-world situations enabled his military triumphs, such as creative use of artillery as a mobile force to support his infantry. He stated later in life:[when?] "I have fought sixty battles and I have learned nothing which I did not know at the beginning. Look at Caesar; he fought the first like the last".[64]

Bonaparte could win battles by concealment of troop deployments and concentration of his forces on the "hinge" of an enemy's weakened front. If he could not use his favourite envelopment strategy, he would take up the central position and attack two co-operating forces at their hinge, swing round to fight one until it fled, then turn to face the other.[65] In this Italian campaign, Bonaparte's army captured 150,000 prisoners, 540 cannons, and 170 standards.[66] The French army fought 67 actions and won 18 pitched battles through superior artillery technology and Bonaparte's tactics.[67]

During the campaign, Bonaparte became increasingly influential in French politics. He founded two newspapers: one for the troops in his army and another for circulation in France.[68] The royalists attacked Bonaparte for looting Italy and warned that he might become a dictator.[69] Napoleon's forces extracted an estimated $45 million in funds from Italy during their campaign there, another $12 million in precious metals and jewels. His forces also confiscated more than three-hundred priceless paintings and sculptures.[70]

Bonaparte sent General Pierre Augereau to Paris to lead a coup d'état and purge the royalists on 4 September—Coup of 18 Fructidor. This left Barras and his Republican allies in control again but dependent on Bonaparte, who proceeded to peace negotiations with Austria. These negotiations resulted in the Treaty of Campo Formio, and Bonaparte returned to Paris in December as a hero.[71] He met Talleyrand, France's new Foreign Minister—who served in the same capacity for Emperor Napoleon—and they began to prepare for an invasion of Britain.[44]

Egyptian expedition
Main article: French campaign in Egypt and Syria
Person on a horse looks towards a giant statue of a head in the desert, with a blue sky
Bonaparte Before the Sphinx, (c. 1868) by Jean-Léon Gérôme, Hearst Castle
Cavalry battlescene with pyramids in background
Battle of the Pyramids on 21 July 1798 by Louis-François, Baron Lejeune, 1808
After two months of planning, Bonaparte decided that France's naval power was not yet strong enough to confront the British Royal Navy. He decided on a military expedition to seize Egypt and thereby undermine Britain's access to its trade interests in India.[44] Bonaparte wished to establish a French presence in the Middle East, linking with Tipu Sultan, a Muslim enemy of the British in India.[72] Napoleon assured the Directory that "as soon as he had conquered Egypt, he will establish relations with the Indian princes and, together with them, attack the English in their possessions".[73] The Directory agreed in order to secure a trade route to India.[74]

In May 1798, Bonaparte was elected a member of the French Academy of Sciences. His Egyptian expedition included a group of 167 scientists, with mathematicians, naturalists, chemists, and geodesists among them. Their discoveries included the Rosetta Stone, and their work was published in the Description de l'Égypte in 1809.[75]

En route to Egypt, Bonaparte reached Malta on 9 June 1798, then controlled by the Knights Hospitaller. Grand Master Ferdinand von Hompesch zu Bolheim surrendered after token resistance, and Bonaparte captured an important naval base with the loss of only three men.[76]

General Bonaparte and his expedition eluded pursuit by the Royal Navy and landed at Alexandria on 1 July.[44] He fought the Battle of Shubra Khit against the Mamluks, Egypt's ruling military caste. This helped the French practise their defensive tactic for the Battle of the Pyramids, fought on 21 July, about 24 km (15 mi) from the pyramids. General Bonaparte's forces of 25,000 roughly equalled those of the Mamluks' Egyptian cavalry. Twenty-nine French[77] and approximately 2,000 Egyptians were killed. The victory boosted the morale of the French army.[78]

On 1 August 1798, the British fleet under Sir Horatio Nelson captured or destroyed all but two French vessels in the Battle of the Nile, defeating Bonaparte's goal to strengthen the French position in the Mediterranean.[79] His army had succeeded in a temporary increase of French power in Egypt, though it faced repeated uprisings.[80] In early 1799, he moved an army into the Ottoman province of Damascus (Syria and Galilee). Bonaparte led these 13,000 French soldiers in the conquest of the coastal towns of Arish, Gaza, Jaffa, and Haifa.[81] The attack on Jaffa was particularly brutal. Bonaparte discovered that many of the defenders were former prisoners of war, ostensibly on parole, so he ordered the garrison and 1,400 prisoners to be executed by bayonet or drowning to save bullets.[79] Men, women, and children were robbed and murdered for three days.[82]

Bonaparte began with an army of 13,000 men; 1,500 were reported missing, 1,200 died in combat, and thousands perished from disease—mostly bubonic plague. He failed to reduce the fortress of Acre, so he marched his army back to Egypt in May. To speed up the retreat, Bonaparte ordered plague-stricken men to be poisoned with opium; the number who died remains disputed, ranging from a low of 30 to a high of 580. He also brought out 1,000 wounded men.[83] Back in Egypt on 25 July, Bonaparte defeated an Ottoman amphibious invasion at Abukir.[84]

Ruler of France
Main articles: 18 Brumaire and Napoleonic era
Bonaparte in a simple general uniform in the middle of a scrum of red-robbed members of the Council of Five Hundred
General Bonaparte surrounded by members of the Council of Five Hundred during the Coup of 18 Brumaire, by François Bouchot
While in Egypt, Bonaparte stayed informed of European affairs. He learned that France had suffered a series of defeats in the War of the Second Coalition.[85] On 24 August 1799, he took advantage of the temporary departure of British ships from French coastal ports and set sail for France, despite the fact that he had received no explicit orders from Paris.[79] The army was left in the charge of Jean Baptiste Kléber.[86]

Unknown to Bonaparte, the Directory had sent him orders to return to ward off possible invasions of French soil, but poor lines of communication prevented the delivery of these messages.[85] By the time that he reached Paris in October, France's situation had been improved by a series of victories. The Republic, however, was bankrupt and the ineffective Directory was unpopular with the French population.[87] The Directory discussed Bonaparte's "desertion" but was too weak to punish him.[85]

Despite the failures in Egypt, Napoleon returned to a hero's welcome. He drew together an alliance with director Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès, his brother Lucien, speaker of the Council of Five Hundred Roger Ducos, director Joseph Fouché, and Talleyrand, and they overthrew the Directory by a coup d'état on 9 November 1799 ("the 18th Brumaire" according to the revolutionary calendar), closing down the Council of Five Hundred. Napoleon became "first consul" for ten years, with two consuls appointed by him who had consultative voices only. His power was confirmed by the new "Constitution of the Year VIII", originally devised by Sieyès to give Napoleon a minor role, but rewritten by Napoleon, and accepted by direct popular vote (3,000,000 in favor, 1,567 opposed). The constitution preserved the appearance of a republic but in reality established a dictatorship.[88][89]

French Consulate
Main articles: French Consulate and War of the Second Coalition

Bonaparte, First Consul, by Ingres. Posing the hand inside the waistcoat was often used in portraits of rulers to indicate calm and stable leadership.
Napoleon established a political system that historian Martyn Lyons called "dictatorship by plebiscite".[90] Worried by the democratic forces unleashed by the Revolution, but unwilling to ignore them entirely, Napoleon resorted to regular electoral consultations with the French people on his road to imperial power.[90] He drafted the Constitution of the Year VIII and secured his own election as First Consul, taking up residence at the Tuileries. The constitution was approved in a rigged plebiscite held the following January, with 99.94 percent officially listed as voting "yes".[91]

Napoleon's brother, Lucien, had falsified the returns to show that 3 million people had participated in the plebiscite. The real number was 1.5 million.[90] Political observers at the time assumed the eligible French voting public numbered about 5 million people, so the regime artificially doubled the participation rate to indicate popular enthusiasm for the Consulate.[90] In the first few months of the Consulate, with war in Europe still raging and internal instability still plaguing the country, Napoleon's grip on power remained very tenuous.[92]

In the spring of 1800, Napoleon and his troops crossed the Swiss Alps into Italy, aiming to surprise the Austrian armies that had reoccupied the peninsula when Napoleon was still in Egypt.[note 6] After a difficult crossing over the Alps, the French army entered the plains of Northern Italy virtually unopposed.[94] While one French army approached from the north, the Austrians were busy with another stationed in Genoa, which was besieged by a substantial force. The fierce resistance of this French army, under André Masséna, gave the northern force some time to carry out their operations with little interference.[95]


The battle of Marengo was Napoleon's first great victory as head of state.
After spending several days looking for each other, the two armies collided at the Battle of Marengo on 14 June. General Melas had a numerical advantage, fielding about 30,000 Austrian soldiers while Napoleon commanded 24,000 French troops.[96] The battle began favorably for the Austrians as their initial attack surprised the French and gradually drove them back. Melas stated that he'd won the battle and retired to his headquarters around 3 pm, leaving his subordinates in charge of pursuing the French.[97] The French lines never broke during their tactical retreat. Napoleon constantly rode out among the troops urging them to stand and fight.[98]

Late in the afternoon, a full division under Desaix arrived on the field and reversed the tide of the battle. A series of artillery barrages and cavalry charges decimated the Austrian army, which fled over the Bormida River back to Alessandria, leaving behind 14,000 casualties.[98] The following day, the Austrian army agreed to abandon Northern Italy once more with the Convention of Alessandria, which granted them safe passage to friendly soil in exchange for their fortresses throughout the region.[98]

Although critics have blamed Napoleon for several tactical mistakes preceding the battle, they have also praised his audacity for selecting a risky campaign strategy, choosing to invade the Italian peninsula from the north when the vast majority of French invasions came from the west, near or along the coastline.[99] As Chandler points out, Napoleon spent almost a year getting the Austrians out of Italy in his first campaign. In 1800, it took him only a month to achieve the same goal.[99] German strategist and field marshal Alfred von Schlieffen concluded that "Bonaparte did not annihilate his enemy but eliminated him and rendered him harmless" while "[attaining] the object of the campaign: the conquest of North Italy".[100]

Napoleon's triumph at Marengo secured his political authority and boosted his popularity back home, but it did not lead to an immediate peace. Bonaparte's brother, Joseph, led the complex negotiations in Lunéville and reported that Austria, emboldened by British support, would not acknowledge the new territory that France had acquired. As negotiations became increasingly fractious, Bonaparte gave orders to his general Moreau to strike Austria once more. Moreau and the French swept through Bavaria and scored an overwhelming victory at Hohenlinden in December 1800. As a result, the Austrians capitulated and signed the Treaty of Lunéville in February 1801. The treaty reaffirmed and expanded earlier French gains at Campo Formio.[101]

Temporary peace in Europe
See also: Haitian Revolution
After a decade of constant warfare, France and Britain signed the Treaty of Amiens in March 1802, bringing the Revolutionary Wars to an end. Amiens called for the withdrawal of British troops from recently conquered colonial territories as well as for assurances to curtail the expansionary goals of the French Republic.[95] With Europe at peace and the economy recovering, Napoleon's popularity soared to its highest levels under the Consulate, both domestically and abroad.[102] In a new plebiscite during the spring of 1802, the French public came out in huge numbers to approve a constitution that made the Consulate permanent, essentially elevating Napoleon to dictator for life.[102]

Whereas the plebiscite two years earlier had brought out 1.5 million people to the polls, the new referendum enticed 3.6 million to go and vote (72 percent of all eligible voters).[103] There was no secret ballot in 1802 and few people wanted to openly defy the regime. The constitution gained approval with over 99% of the vote.[103] His broad powers were spelled out in the new constitution: Article 1. The French people name, and the Senate proclaims Napoleon-Bonaparte First Consul for Life.[104] After 1802, he was generally referred to as Napoleon rather than Bonaparte.[39]


The 1803 Louisiana Purchase totaled 827,987 square miles (2,144,480 square kilometers), doubling the size of the United States.
The brief peace in Europe allowed Napoleon to focus on the French colonies abroad. Saint-Domingue had managed to acquire a high level of political autonomy during the Revolutionary Wars, with Toussaint Louverture installing himself as de facto dictator by 1801. Napoleon saw his chance to recuperate the formerly wealthy colony when he signed the Treaty of Amiens. During the Revolution, the National Convention voted to abolish slavery in February 1794. Under the terms of Amiens, Napoleon agreed to appease British demands by not abolishing slavery in any colonies where the 1794 decree had never been implemented. The resulting Law of 20 May never applied to colonies like Guadeloupe or Guyane, even though rogue generals and other officials used the pretext of peace as an opportunity to reinstate slavery in some of these places. The Law of 20 May officially restored the slave trade to the Caribbean colonies, not slavery itself.[105]

Napoleon sent an expedition under General Leclerc to reassert control over Sainte-Domingue. Although the French managed to capture Toussaint Louverture, the expedition failed when high rates of disease crippled the French army. In May 1803, the last 8000 French troops left the island and the slaves proclaimed an independent republic that they called Haïti in 1804.[106] Seeing the failure of his colonial efforts, Napoleon decided in 1803 to sell the Louisiana Territory to the United States, instantly doubling the size of the U.S. The selling price in the Louisiana Purchase was less than three cents per acre, a total of $15 million.[2][107]

The peace with Britain proved to be uneasy and controversial.[108] Britain did not evacuate Malta as promised and protested against Bonaparte's annexation of Piedmont and his Act of Mediation, which established a new Swiss Confederation. Neither of these territories were covered by Amiens, but they inflamed tensions significantly.[109] The dispute culminated in a declaration of war by Britain in May 1803; Napoleon responded by reassembling the invasion camp at Boulogne.[79]

French Empire
Main article: First French Empire
See also: Coronation of Napoleon I and Napoleonic Wars
Colored painting depicting Napoleon crowning his wife inside of a cathedral
The Coronation of Napoleon by Jacques-Louis David (1804)
During the Consulate, Napoleon faced several royalist and Jacobin assassination plots, including the Conspiration des poignards (Dagger plot) in October 1800 and the Plot of the Rue Saint-Nicaise (also known as the Infernal Machine) two months later.[110] In January 1804, his police uncovered an assassination plot against him that involved Moreau and which was ostensibly sponsored by the Bourbon family, the former rulers of France. On the advice of Talleyrand, Napoleon ordered the kidnapping of the Duke of Enghien, violating the sovereignty of Baden. The Duke was quickly executed after a secret military trial, even though he had not been involved in the plot.[111] Enghien's execution infuriated royal courts throughout Europe, becoming one of the contributing political factors for the outbreak of the Napoleonic Wars.

To expand his power, Napoleon used these assassination plots to justify the creation of an imperial system based on the Roman model. He believed that a Bourbon restoration would be more difficult if his family's succession was entrenched in the constitution.[112] Launching yet another referendum, Napoleon was elected as Emperor of the French by a tally exceeding 99%.[103] As with the Life Consulate two years earlier, this referendum produced heavy participation, bringing out almost 3.6 million voters to the polls.[103]

A keen observer of Bonaparte's rise to absolute power, Madame de Rémusat, explains that "men worn out by the turmoil of the Revolution … looked for the domination of an able ruler" and that "people believed quite sincerely that Bonaparte, whether as consul or emperor, would exert his authority and save [them] from the perils of anarchy.[113]"


Napoleon's throne room at Fontainebleau
Napoleon's coronation took place on 2 December 1804. Two separate crowns were brought for the ceremony: a golden laurel wreath recalling the Roman Empire and a replica of Charlemagne's crown.[114] Napoleon entered the ceremony wearing the laurel wreath and kept it on his head throughout the proceedings.[114] For the official coronation, he raised the Charlemagne crown over his own head in a symbolic gesture, but never placed it on top because he was already wearing the golden wreath.[114] Instead he placed the crown on Josephine's head, the event commemorated in the officially sanctioned painting by Jacques-Louis David.[114] Napoleon was also crowned King of Italy, with the Iron Crown of Lombardy, at the Cathedral of Milan on 26 May 1805. He created eighteen Marshals of the Empire from among his top generals to secure the allegiance of the army on 18 May 1804, the official start of the Empire.[citation needed]

War of the Third Coalition
Main article: War of the Third Coalition
Colored painting depicting Napoleon receiving the surrender of the Austrian generals, with the opposing armies and the city of Ulm in the background
Napoleon and the Grande Armée receive the surrender of Austrian General Mack after the Battle of Ulm in October 1805. The decisive finale of the Ulm Campaign raised the tally of captured Austrian soldiers to 60,000. With the Austrian army destroyed, Vienna would fall to the French in November.
Great Britain had broken the Peace of Amiens by declaring war on France in May 1803.[115] In December 1804, an Anglo-Swedish agreement became the first step towards the creation of the Third Coalition. By April 1805, Britain had also signed an alliance with Russia.[116] Austria had been defeated by France twice in recent memory and wanted revenge, so it joined the coalition a few months later.[117]

Before the formation of the Third Coalition, Napoleon had assembled an invasion force, the Armée d'Angleterre, around six camps at Boulogne in Northern France. He intended to use this invasion force to strike at England. They never invaded, but Napoleon's troops received careful and invaluable training for future military operations.[118] The men at Boulogne formed the core for what Napoleon later called La Grande Armée. At the start, this French army had about 200,000 men organized into seven corps, which were large field units that contained 36–40 cannons each and were capable of independent action until other corps could come to the rescue.[119]

A single corps properly situated in a strong defensive position could survive at least a day without support, giving the Grande Armée countless strategic and tactical options on every campaign. On top of these forces, Napoleon created a cavalry reserve of 22,000 organized into two cuirassier divisions, four mounted dragoon divisions, one division of dismounted dragoons, and one of light cavalry, all supported by 24 artillery pieces.[120] By 1805, the Grande Armée had grown to a force of 350,000 men,[120] who were well equipped, well trained, and led by competent officers.[121]

Napoleon knew that the French fleet could not defeat the Royal Navy in a head-to-head battle, so he planned to lure it away from the English Channel through diversionary tactics.[122] The main strategic idea involved the French Navy escaping from the British blockades of Toulon and Brest and threatening to attack the West Indies. In the face of this attack, it was hoped, the British would weaken their defense of the Western Approaches by sending ships to the Caribbean, allowing a combined Franco-Spanish fleet to take control of the channel long enough for French armies to cross and invade.[122] However, the plan unraveled after the British victory at the Battle of Cape Finisterre in July 1805. French Admiral Villeneuve then retreated to Cádiz instead of linking up with French naval forces at Brest for an attack on the English Channel.[123]

By August 1805, Napoleon had realised that the strategic situation had changed fundamentally. Facing a potential invasion from his continental enemies, he decided to strike first and turned his army's sights from the English Channel to the Rhine. His basic objective was to destroy the isolated Austrian armies in Southern Germany before their Russian allies could arrive. On 25 September, after great secrecy and feverish marching, 200,000 French troops began to cross the Rhine on a front of 260 km (160 mi).[124][125]

Austrian commander Karl Mack had gathered the greater part of the Austrian army at the fortress of Ulm in Swabia. Napoleon swung his forces to the southeast and the Grande Armée performed an elaborate wheeling movement that outflanked the Austrian positions. The Ulm Maneuver completely surprised General Mack, who belatedly understood that his army had been cut off. After some minor engagements that culminated in the Battle of Ulm, Mack finally surrendered after realising that there was no way to break out of the French encirclement. For just 2,000 French casualties, Napoleon had managed to capture a total of 60,000 Austrian soldiers through his army's rapid marching.[126]

The Ulm Campaign is generally regarded as a strategic masterpiece and was influential in the development of the Schlieffen Plan in the late 19th century.[127] For the French, this spectacular victory on land was soured by the decisive victory that the Royal Navy attained at the Battle of Trafalgar on 21 October. After Trafalgar, Britain had total domination of the seas for the duration of the Napoleonic Wars.[citation needed]


Napoleon at the Battle of Austerlitz, by François Gérard 1805. The Battle of Austerlitz, also known as the Battle of the Three Emperors, was one of Napoleon's many victories, where the French Empire defeated the Third Coalition.
Following the Ulm Campaign, French forces managed to capture Vienna in November. The fall of Vienna provided the French a huge bounty as they captured 100,000 muskets, 500 cannons, and the intact bridges across the Danube.[128] At this critical juncture, both Tsar Alexander I and Holy Roman Emperor Francis II decided to engage Napoleon in battle, despite reservations from some of their subordinates. Napoleon sent his army north in pursuit of the Allies, but then ordered his forces to retreat so that he could feign a grave weakness.[129]

Desperate to lure the Allies into battle, Napoleon gave every indication in the days preceding the engagement that the French army was in a pitiful state, even abandoning the dominant Pratzen Heights near the village of Austerlitz. At the Battle of Austerlitz, in Moravia on 2 December, he deployed the French army below the Pratzen Heights and deliberately weakened his right flank, enticing the Allies to launch a major assault there in the hopes of rolling up the whole French line. A forced march from Vienna by Marshal Davout and his III Corps plugged the gap left by Napoleon just in time.[130]

Meanwhile, the heavy Allied deployment against the French right flank weakened their center on the Pratzen Heights, which was viciously attacked by the IV Corps of Marshal Soult. With the Allied center demolished, the French swept through both enemy flanks and sent the Allies fleeing chaotically, capturing thousands of prisoners in the process. The battle is often seen as a tactical masterpiece because of the near-perfect execution of a calibrated but dangerous plan—of the same stature as Cannae, the celebrated triumph by Hannibal some 2,000 years before.[131]

The Allied disaster at Austerlitz significantly shook the faith of Emperor Francis in the British-led war effort. France and Austria agreed to an armistice immediately and the Treaty of Pressburg followed shortly after on 26 December. Pressburg took Austria out of both the war and the Coalition while reinforcing the earlier treaties of Campo Formio and of Lunéville between the two powers. The treaty confirmed the Austrian loss of lands to France in Italy and Bavaria, and lands in Germany to Napoleon's German allies. It also imposed an indemnity of 40 million francs on the defeated Habsburgs and allowed the fleeing Russian troops free passage through hostile territories and back to their home soil. Napoleon went on to say, "The battle of Austerlitz is the finest of all I have fought".[132] Frank McLynn suggests that Napoleon was so successful at Austerlitz that he lost touch with reality, and what used to be French foreign policy became a "personal Napoleonic one".[133] Vincent Cronin disagrees, stating that Napoleon was not overly ambitious for himself, "he embodied the ambitions of thirty million Frenchmen".[134]

Middle-Eastern alliances
Main articles: Franco-Ottoman alliance and Franco-Persian alliance

Napoleon I, miniature painting made in 1807 by Jean Baptiste Isabey.

The Iranian envoy Mirza Mohammed Reza-Qazvini meeting with Napoleon I at the Finckenstein Palace in West Prussia, 27 April 1807, to sign the Treaty of Finckenstein.
Napoleon continued to entertain a grand scheme to establish a French presence in the Middle East in order to put pressure on Britain and Russia, and perhaps form an alliance with the Ottoman Empire.[72] In February 1806, Ottoman Emperor Selim III recognised Napoleon as Emperor. He also opted for an alliance with France, calling France "our sincere and natural ally".[135] That decision brought the Ottoman Empire into a losing war against Russia and Britain. A Franco-Persian alliance was also formed between Napoleon and the Persian Empire of Fat′h-Ali Shah Qajar. It collapsed in 1807, when France and Russia themselves formed an unexpected alliance.[72] In the end, Napoleon had made no effective alliances in the Middle East.[136]

War of the Fourth Coalition and Tilsit
Main article: War of the Fourth Coalition
After Austerlitz, Napoleon established the Confederation of the Rhine in 1806. A collection of German states intended to serve as a buffer zone between France and Central Europe, the creation of the Confederation spelled the end of the Holy Roman Empire and significantly alarmed the Prussians. The brazen reorganization of German territory by the French risked threatening Prussian influence in the region, if not eliminating it outright. War fever in Berlin rose steadily throughout the summer of 1806. At the insistence of his court, especially his wife Queen Louise, Frederick William III decided to challenge the French domination of Central Europe by going to war.[137]


Napoleon reviews the Imperial Guard before the Battle of Jena.
The initial military maneuvers began in September 1806. In a letter to Marshal Soult detailing the plan for the campaign, Napoleon described the essential features of Napoleonic warfare and introduced the phrase le bataillon-carré ("square battalion").[138] In the bataillon-carré system, the various corps of the Grande Armée would march uniformly together in close supporting distance.[138] If any single corps was attacked, the others could quickly spring into action and arrive to help.[139]

Napoleon invaded Prussia with 180,000 troops, rapidly marching on the right bank of the River Saale. As in previous campaigns, his fundamental objective was to destroy one opponent before reinforcements from another could tip the balance of the war. Upon learning the whereabouts of the Prussian army, the French swung westwards and crossed the Saale with overwhelming force. At the twin battles of Jena and Auerstedt, fought on 14 October, the French convincingly defeated the Prussians and inflicted heavy casualties. With several major commanders dead or incapacitated, the Prussian king proved incapable of effectively commanding the army, which began to quickly disintegrate.[140]

In a vaunted pursuit that epitomized the "peak of Napoleonic warfare", according to historian Richard Brooks,[141] the French managed to capture 140,000 soldiers, over 2,000 cannons and hundreds of ammunition wagons, all in a single month. Historian David Chandler wrote of the Prussian forces: "Never has the morale of any army been more completely shattered".[138] Despite their overwhelming defeat, the Prussians refused to negotiate with the French until the Russians had an opportunity to enter the fight.


The Treaties of Tilsit: Napoleon meeting with Alexander I of Russia on a raft in the middle of the Neman River
Following his triumph, Napoleon imposed the first elements of the Continental System through the Berlin Decree issued in November 1806. The Continental System, which prohibited European nations from trading with Britain, was widely violated throughout his reign.[142][143] In the next few months, Napoleon marched against the advancing Russian armies through Poland and was involved in the bloody stalemate at the Battle of Eylau in February 1807.[144] After a period of rest and consolidation on both sides, the war restarted in June with an initial struggle at Heilsberg that proved indecisive.[145]

On 14 June Napoleon obtained an overwhelming victory over the Russians at the Battle of Friedland, wiping out the majority of the Russian army in a very bloody struggle. The scale of their defeat convinced the Russians to make peace with the French. On 19 June, Czar Alexander sent an envoy to seek an armistice with Napoleon. The latter assured the envoy that the Vistula River represented the natural borders between French and Russian influence in Europe. On that basis, the two emperors began peace negotiations at the town of Tilsit after meeting on an iconic raft on the River Niemen. The very first thing Alexander said to Napoleon was probably well-calibrated: "I hate the English as much as you do".[146]

Alexander faced pressure from his brother, Duke Constantine, to make peace with Napoleon. Given the victory he had just achieved, the French emperor offered the Russians relatively lenient terms—demanding that Russia join the Continental System, withdraw its forces from Wallachia and Moldavia, and hand over the Ionian Islands to France.[147] By contrast, Napoleon dictated very harsh peace terms for Prussia, despite the ceaseless exhortations of Queen Louise. Wiping out half of Prussian territories from the map, Napoleon created a new kingdom of 1,100 square miles called Westphalia and appointed his young brother Jérôme as its monarch. Prussia's humiliating treatment at Tilsit caused a deep and bitter antagonism which festered as the Napoleonic era progressed. Moreover, Alexander's pretensions at friendship with Napoleon led the latter to seriously misjudge the true intentions of his Russian counterpart, who would violate numerous provisions of the treaty in the next few years. Despite these problems, the Treaties of Tilsit at last gave Napoleon a respite from war and allowed him to return to France, which he had not seen in over 300 days.[148]

Peninsular War and Erfurt
Main article: Peninsular War
The settlements at Tilsit gave Napoleon time to organize his empire. One of his major objectives became enforcing the Continental System against the British. He decided to focus his attention on the Kingdom of Portugal, which consistently violated his trade prohibitions. After defeat in the War of the Oranges in 1801, Portugal adopted a double-sided policy. At first, John VI agreed to close his ports to British trade. The situation changed dramatically after the Franco-Spanish defeat at Trafalgar; John grew bolder and officially resumed diplomatic and trade relations with Britain.[citation needed]


Joseph Bonaparte, Napoleon's brother, as King of Spain
Unhappy with this change of policy by the Portuguese government, Napoleon negotiated a secret treaty with Charles IV of Spain and sent an army to invade Portugal.[149] On 17 October 1807, 24,000 French troops under General Junot crossed the Pyrenees with Spanish cooperation and headed towards Portugal to enforce Napoleon's orders.[150] This attack was the first step in what would eventually become the Peninsular War, a six-year struggle that significantly sapped French strength. Throughout the winter of 1808, French agents became increasingly involved in Spanish internal affairs, attempting to incite discord between members of the Spanish royal family. On 16 February 1808, secret French machinations finally materialized when Napoleon announced that he would intervene to mediate between the rival political factions in the country.[151]

Marshal Murat led 120,000 troops into Spain. The French arrived in Madrid on 24 March,[152] where wild riots against the occupation erupted just a few weeks later. Napoleon appointed his brother, Joseph Bonaparte, as the new King of Spain in the summer of 1808. The appointment enraged a heavily religious and conservative Spanish population. Resistance to French aggression soon spread throughout Spain. The shocking French defeat at the Battle of Bailén in July gave hope to Napoleon's enemies and partly persuaded the French emperor to intervene in person.[citation needed]

Before going to Iberia, Napoleon decided to address several lingering issues with the Russians. At the Congress of Erfurt in October 1808, Napoleon hoped to keep Russia on his side during the upcoming struggle in Spain and during any potential conflict against Austria. The two sides reached an agreement, the Erfurt Convention, that called upon Britain to cease its war against France, that recognized the Russian conquest of Finland from Sweden, and that affirmed Russian support for France in a possible war against Austria "to the best of its ability".[153]

Napoleon then returned to France and prepared for war. The Grande Armée, under the Emperor's personal command, rapidly crossed the Ebro River in November 1808 and inflicted a series of crushing defeats against the Spanish forces. After clearing the last Spanish force guarding the capital at Somosierra, Napoleon entered Madrid on 4 December with 80,000 troops.[154] He then unleashed his soldiers against Moore and the British forces. The British were swiftly driven to the coast, and they withdrew from Spain entirely after a last stand at the Battle of Corunna in January 1809.[citation needed]


Napoleon accepts the surrender of Madrid, 4 December 1808
Napoleon would end up leaving Iberia in order to deal with the Austrians in Central Europe, but the Peninsular War continued on long after his absence. He never returned to Spain after the 1808 campaign. Several months after Corunna, the British sent another army to the peninsula under the future Duke of Wellington. The war then settled into a complex and asymmetric strategic deadlock where all sides struggled to gain the upper hand. The highlight of the conflict became the brutal guerrilla warfare that engulfed much of the Spanish countryside. Both sides committed the worst atrocities of the Napoleonic Wars during this phase of the conflict.[155]

The vicious guerrilla fighting in Spain, largely absent from the French campaigns in Central Europe, severely disrupted the French lines of supply and communication. Although France maintained roughly 300,000 troops in Iberia during the Peninsular War, the vast majority were tied down to garrison duty and to intelligence operations.[156] The French were never able to concentrate all of their forces effectively, prolonging the war until events elsewhere in Europe finally turned the tide in favor of the Allies. After the invasion of Russia in 1812, the number of French troops in Spain vastly declined as Napoleon needed reinforcements to conserve his strategic position in Europe. By 1814, after scores of battles and sieges throughout Iberia, the Allies had managed to push the French out of the peninsula.[citation needed]

The impact of the Napoleonic invasion of Spain and ousting of the Spanish Bourbon monarchy in favor of his brother Joseph had an enormous impact on the Spanish empire. In Spanish America many local elites formed juntas and set up mechanisms to rule in the name of Ferdinand VII of Spain, whom they considered the legitimate Spanish monarch. The outbreak of the Spanish American wars of independence in most of the empire was a result of Napoleon's destabilizing actions in Spain and led to the rise of strongmen in the wake of these wars.[157]

War of the Fifth Coalition and Marie Louise
Main article: War of the Fifth Coalition

Napoleon at the Battle of Wagram, painted by Horace Vernet
After four years on the sidelines, Austria sought another war with France to avenge its recent defeats. Austria could not count on Russian support because the latter was at war with Britain, Sweden, and the Ottoman Empire in 1809. Frederick William of Prussia initially promised to help the Austrians, but reneged before conflict began.[158] A report from the Austrian finance minister suggested that the treasury would run out of money by the middle of 1809 if the large army that the Austrians had formed since the Third Coalition remained mobilized.[158] Although Archduke Charles warned that the Austrians were not ready for another showdown with Napoleon, a stance that landed him in the so-called "peace party", he did not want to see the army demobilized either.[158] On 8 February 1809, the advocates for war finally succeeded when the Imperial Government secretly decided on another confrontation against the French.[citation needed]

In the early morning of 10 April, leading elements of the Austrian army crossed the Inn River and invaded Bavaria. The early Austrian attack surprised the French; Napoleon himself was still in Paris when he heard about the invasion. He arrived at Donauwörth on the 17th to find the Grande Armée in a dangerous position, with its two wings separated by 75 miles (121 km) and joined together by a thin cordon of Bavarian troops. Charles pressed the left wing of the French army and hurled his men towards the III Corps of Marshal Davout. In response, Napoleon came up with a plan to cut off the Austrians in the celebrated Landshut Maneuver.[159] He realigned the axis of his army and marched his soldiers towards the town of Eckmühl. The French scored a convincing win in the resulting Battle of Eckmühl, forcing Charles to withdraw his forces over the Danube and into Bohemia. On 13 May, Vienna fell for the second time in four years, although the war continued since most of the Austrian army had survived the initial engagements in Southern Germany.


The entry of Bonaparte in Schönbrunn, Vienna
By 17 May, the main Austrian army under Charles had arrived on the Marchfeld. Charles kept the bulk of his troops several miles away from the river bank in hopes of concentrating them at the point where Napoleon decided to cross. On 21 May, the French made their first major effort to cross the Danube, precipitating the Battle of Aspern-Essling. The Austrians enjoyed a comfortable numerical superiority over the French throughout the battle. On the first day, Charles disposed of 110,000 soldiers against only 31,000 commanded by Napoleon.[160] By the second day, reinforcements had boosted French numbers up to 70,000.[161]

The battle was characterized by a vicious back-and-forth struggle for the two villages of Aspern and Essling, the focal points of the French bridgehead. By the end of the fighting, the French had lost Aspern but still controlled Essling. A sustained Austrian artillery bombardment eventually convinced Napoleon to withdraw his forces back onto Lobau Island. Both sides inflicted about 23,000 casualties on each other.[162] It was the first defeat Napoleon suffered in a major set-piece battle, and it caused excitement throughout many parts of Europe because it proved that he could be beaten on the battlefield.[163]

After the setback at Aspern-Essling, Napoleon took more than six weeks in planning and preparing for contingencies before he made another attempt at crossing the Danube.[164] From 30 June to the early days of July, the French recrossed the Danube in strength, with more than 180,000 troops marching across the Marchfeld towards the Austrians.[164] Charles received the French with 150,000 of his own men.[165] In the ensuing Battle of Wagram, which also lasted two days, Napoleon commanded his forces in what was the largest battle of his career up until then. Napoleon finished off the battle with a concentrated central thrust that punctured a hole in the Austrian army and forced Charles to retreat. Austrian losses were very heavy, reaching well over 40,000 casualties.[166] The French were too exhausted to pursue the Austrians immediately, but Napoleon eventually caught up with Charles at Znaim and the latter signed an armistice on 12 July.

Map of Europe. French Empire shown as bigger than present day France as it included parts of present-day Netherlands and Italy.
First French Empire at its greatest extent in 1811
  French Empire
  French satellite states
  Allied states
In the Kingdom of Holland, the British launched the Walcheren Campaign to open up a second front in the war and to relieve the pressure on the Austrians. The British army only landed at Walcheren on 30 July, by which point the Austrians had already been defeated. The Walcheren Campaign was characterized by little fighting but heavy casualties thanks to the popularly dubbed "Walcheren Fever". Over 4000 British troops were lost in a bungled campaign, and the rest withdrew in December 1809.[167] The main strategic result from the campaign became the delayed political settlement between the French and the Austrians. Emperor Francis wanted to wait and see how the British performed in their theater before entering into negotiations with Napoleon. Once it became apparent that the British were going nowhere, the Austrians agreed to peace talks.[citation needed]

The resulting Treaty of Schönbrunn in October 1809 was the harshest that France had imposed on Austria in recent memory. Metternich and Archduke Charles had the preservation of the Habsburg Empire as their fundamental goal, and to this end they succeeded by making Napoleon seek more modest goals in return for promises of friendship between the two powers.[168] Nevertheless, while most of the hereditary lands remained a part of the Habsburg realm, France received Carinthia, Carniola, and the Adriatic ports, while Galicia was given to the Poles and the Salzburg area of the Tyrol went to the Bavarians.[168] Austria lost over three million subjects, about one-fifth of her total population, as a result of these territorial changes.[169] Although fighting in Iberia continued, the War of the Fifth Coalition would be the last major conflict on the European continent for the next three years.[citation needed]

Napoleon turned his focus to domestic affairs after the war. Empress Joséphine had still not given birth to a child from Napoleon, who became worried about the future of his empire following his death. Desperate for a legitimate heir, Napoleon divorced Joséphine on 10 January 1810 and started looking for a new wife. Hoping to cement the recent alliance with Austria through a family connection, Napoleon married the Archduchess Marie Louise, who was 18 years old at the time. On 20 March 1811, Marie Louise gave birth to a baby boy, whom Napoleon made heir apparent and bestowed the title of King of Rome. His son never actually ruled the empire, but historians still refer to him as Napoleon II.[citation needed]

Invasion of Russia
Main article: French invasion of Russia

Engraving of 'Napoleon le Grand', ca 1810 from a portrait by Noël François Bertrand
In 1808, Napoleon and Czar Alexander met at the Congress of Erfurt to preserve the Russo-French alliance. The leaders had a friendly personal relationship after their first meeting at Tilsit in 1807.[170] By 1811, however, tensions had increased and Alexander was under pressure from the Russian nobility to break off the alliance.[citation needed] A major strain on the relationship between the two nations became the regular violations of the Continental System by the Russians, which led Napoleon to threaten Alexander with serious consequences if he formed an alliance with Britain.[171]


The Moscow fire depicted by an unknown German artist

Napoleon's withdrawal from Russia, painting by Adolph Northen
By 1812, advisers to Alexander suggested the possibility of an invasion of the French Empire and the recapture of Poland. On receipt of intelligence reports on Russia's war preparations, Napoleon expanded his Grande Armée to more than 450,000 men.[172] He ignored repeated advice against an invasion of the Russian heartland and prepared for an offensive campaign; on 24 June 1812 the invasion commenced.[173]

In an attempt to gain increased support from Polish nationalists and patriots, Napoleon termed the war the Second Polish War—the First Polish War had been the Bar Confederation uprising by Polish nobles against Russia in 1768. Polish patriots wanted the Russian part of Poland to be joined with the Duchy of Warsaw and an independent Poland created. This was rejected by Napoleon, who stated he had promised his ally Austria this would not happen. Napoleon refused to manumit the Russian serfs because of concerns this might provoke a reaction in his army's rear. The serfs later committed atrocities against French soldiers during France's retreat.[174]

The Russians avoided Napoleon's objective of a decisive engagement and instead retreated deeper into Russia. A brief attempt at resistance was made at Smolensk in August; the Russians were defeated in a series of battles, and Napoleon resumed his advance. The Russians again avoided battle, although in a few cases this was only achieved because Napoleon uncharacteristically hesitated to attack when the opportunity arose. Owing to the Russian army's scorched earth tactics, the French found it increasingly difficult to forage food for themselves and their horses.[175]

The Russians eventually offered battle outside Moscow on 7 September: the Battle of Borodino resulted in approximately 44,000 Russian and 35,000 French dead, wounded or captured, and may have been the bloodiest day of battle in history up to that point in time.[176] Although the French had won, the Russian army had accepted, and withstood, the major battle Napoleon had hoped would be decisive. Napoleon's own account was: "The most terrible of all my battles was the one before Moscow. The French showed themselves to be worthy of victory, but the Russians showed themselves worthy of being invincible".[177]

The Russian army withdrew and retreated past Moscow. Napoleon entered the city, assuming its fall would end the war and Alexander would negotiate peace. However, on orders of the city's governor Feodor Rostopchin, rather than capitulation, Moscow was burned. After five weeks, Napoleon and his army left. In early November Napoleon got concerned about loss of control back in France after the Malet coup of 1812. His army walked through snow up to their knees, and nearly 10,000 men and horses froze to death on the night of 8/9 November alone. After the Battle of Berezina Napoleon managed to escape but had to abandon much of the remaining artillery and baggage train. On 5 December, shortly before arriving in Vilnius, Napoleon left the army in a sledge.[178]

The French suffered in the course of a ruinous retreat, including from the harshness of the Russian Winter. The Armée had begun as over 400,000 frontline troops, with fewer than 40,000 crossing the Berezina River in November 1812.[179] The Russians had lost 150,000 in battle and hundreds of thousands of civilians.[180]

War of the Sixth Coalition
Main article: War of the Sixth Coalition

Napoleon's farewell to his Imperial Guard, 20 April 1814
There was a lull in fighting over the winter of 1812–13 while both the Russians and the French rebuilt their forces; Napoleon was able to field 350,000 troops.[181] Heartened by France's loss in Russia, Prussia joined with Austria, Sweden, Russia, Great Britain, Spain, and Portugal in a new coalition. Napoleon assumed command in Germany and inflicted a series of defeats on the Coalition culminating in the Battle of Dresden in August 1813.[182]

Despite these successes, the numbers continued to mount against Napoleon, and the French army was pinned down by a force twice its size and lost at the Battle of Leipzig. This was by far the largest battle of the Napoleonic Wars and cost more than 90,000 casualties in total.[183]

The Allies offered peace terms in the Frankfurt proposals in November 1813. Napoleon would remain as Emperor of France, but it would be reduced to its "natural frontiers". That meant that France could retain control of Belgium, Savoy and the Rhineland (the west bank of the Rhine River), while giving up control of all the rest, including all of Spain and the Netherlands, and most of Italy and Germany. Metternich told Napoleon these were the best terms the Allies were likely to offer; after further victories, the terms would be harsher and harsher. Metternich's motivation was to maintain France as a balance against Russian threats, while ending the highly destabilizing series of wars.[184]

Napoleon, expecting to win the war, delayed too long and lost this opportunity; by December the Allies had withdrawn the offer. When his back was to the wall in 1814 he tried to reopen peace negotiations on the basis of accepting the Frankfurt proposals. The Allies now had new, harsher terms that included the retreat of France to its 1791 boundaries, which meant the loss of Belgium. Napoleon would remain Emperor, however he rejected the term. The British wanted Napoleon permanently removed, and they prevailed, but Napoleon adamantly refused.[184][185]


Napoleon abdicated in Fontainebleau, 4 April 1814, by Paul Delaroche
Napoleon withdrew back into France, his army reduced to 70,000 soldiers and little cavalry; he faced more than three times as many Allied troops.[186] The French were surrounded: British armies pressed from the south, and other Coalition forces positioned to attack from the German states. Napoleon won a series of victories in the Six Days' Campaign, though these were not significant enough to turn the tide. The leaders of Paris surrendered to the Coalition in March 1814.[187]

On 1 April, Alexander addressed the Sénat conservateur. Long docile to Napoleon, under Talleyrand's prodding it had turned against him. Alexander told the Sénat that the Allies were fighting against Napoleon, not France, and they were prepared to offer honorable peace terms if Napoleon were removed from power. The next day, the Sénat passed the Acte de déchéance de l'Empereur ("Emperor's Demise Act"), which declared Napoleon deposed. Napoleon had advanced as far as Fontainebleau when he learned that Paris was lost. When Napoleon proposed the army march on the capital, his senior officers and marshals mutinied.[188]

On 4 April, led by Ney, they confronted Napoleon. Napoleon asserted the army would follow him, and Ney replied the army would follow its generals. While the ordinary soldiers and regimental officers wanted to fight on, without any senior officers or marshals any prospective invasion of Paris would have been impossible. Bowing to the inevitable, on 4 April Napoleon abdicated in favour of his son, with Marie Louise as regent. However, the Allies refused to accept this under prodding from Alexander, who feared that Napoleon might find an excuse to retake the throne.[189] Napoleon was then forced to announce his unconditional abdication only two days later.

Exile to Elba
Cartoon of Napoleon sitting back to front on a donkey with a broken sword and two soldiers in the background drumming
British etching from 1814 in celebration of Napoleon's first exile to Elba at the close of the War of the Sixth Coalition
The Allied Powers having declared that Emperor Napoleon was the sole obstacle to the restoration of peace in Europe, Emperor Napoleon, faithful to his oath, declares that he renounces, for himself and his heirs, the thrones of France and Italy, and that there is no personal sacrifice, even that of his life, which he is not ready to do in the interests of France.
Done in the palace of Fontainebleau, 11 April 1814.

— Act of abdication of Napoleon[190]
In the Treaty of Fontainebleau, the Allies exiled Napoleon to Elba, an island of 12,000 inhabitants in the Mediterranean, 20 km (12 mi) off the Tuscan coast. They gave him sovereignty over the island and allowed him to retain the title of Emperor. Napoleon attempted suicide with a pill he had carried after nearly being captured by the Russians during the retreat from Moscow. Its potency had weakened with age, however, and he survived to be exiled, while his wife and son took refuge in Austria.[191] In the first few months on Elba he created a small navy and army, developed the iron mines, oversaw the construction of new roads, issued decrees on modern agricultural methods, and overhauled the island's legal and educational system.[192][193]

A few months into his exile, Napoleon learned that his ex-wife Josephine had died in France. He was devastated by the news, locking himself in his room and refusing to leave for two days.[194]

Hundred Days
Main article: Hundred Days

Napoleon's return from Elba, by Charles de Steuben
Separated from his wife and son, who had returned to Austria, cut off from the allowance guaranteed to him by the Treaty of Fontainebleau, and aware of rumours he was about to be banished to a remote island in the Atlantic Ocean,[195] Napoleon escaped from Elba, in the brig Inconstant on 26 February 1815 with 700 men.[195] Two days later, he landed on the French mainland at Golfe-Juan and started heading north.[195]

The 5th Regiment was sent to intercept him and made contact just south of Grenoble on 7 March 1815. Napoleon approached the regiment alone, dismounted his horse and, when he was within gunshot range, shouted to the soldiers, "Here I am. Kill your Emperor, if you wish".[196] The soldiers quickly responded with, "Vive L'Empereur!" Ney, who had boasted to the restored Bourbon king, Louis XVIII, that he would bring Napoleon to Paris in an iron cage, affectionately kissed his former emperor and forgot his oath of allegiance to the Bourbon monarch. The two then marched together towards Paris with a growing army. The unpopular Louis XVIII fled to Belgium after realizing he had little political support. On 13 March, the powers at the Congress of Vienna declared Napoleon an outlaw. Four days later, Great Britain, Russia, Austria, and Prussia each pledged to put 150,000 men into the field to end his rule.[197]

Napoleon arrived in Paris on 20 March and governed for a period now called the Hundred Days. By the start of June the armed forces available to him had reached 200,000, and he decided to go on the offensive to attempt to drive a wedge between the oncoming British and Prussian armies. The French Army of the North crossed the frontier into the United Kingdom of the Netherlands, in modern-day Belgium.[198]

Napoleon's forces fought the Coalition armies, commanded by the Duke of Wellington and Gebhard Leberecht von Blücher, at the Battle of Waterloo on 18 June 1815. Wellington's army withstood repeated attacks by the French and drove them from the field while the Prussians arrived in force and broke through Napoleon's right flank.

Napoleon returned to Paris and found that both the legislature and the people had turned against him. Realizing his position was untenable, he abdicated on 22 June in favour of his son. He left Paris three days later and settled at Josephine's former palace in Malmaison (on the western bank of the Seine about 17 kilometres (11 mi) west of Paris). Even as Napoleon travelled to Paris, the Coalition forces swept through France (arriving in the vicinity of Paris on 29 June), with the stated intent of restoring Louis XVIII to the French throne.

When Napoleon heard that Prussian troops had orders to capture him dead or alive, he fled to Rochefort, considering an escape to the United States. British ships were blocking every port. Napoleon demanded asylum from the British Captain Frederick Maitland on HMS Bellerophon on 15 July 1815.[199]

Exile on Saint Helena

Napoleon on Saint Helena, watercolor by Franz Josef Sandmann
Photo of a front garden and large brown building. French flag on a flagpole next to a small cannon.
Longwood House, Saint Helena, site of Napoleon's captivity
The British kept Napoleon on the island of Saint Helena in the Atlantic Ocean, 1,870 km (1,162 mi) from the west coast of Africa. They also took the precaution of sending a garrison of soldiers to uninhabited Ascension Island, which lay between St. Helena and Europe.[200]

Napoleon was moved to Longwood House on Saint Helena in December 1815; it had fallen into disrepair, and the location was damp, windswept and unhealthy.[201][202] The Times published articles insinuating the British government was trying to hasten his death. Napoleon often complained of the living conditions in letters to the governor and his custodian, Hudson Lowe,[203] while his attendants complained of "colds, catarrhs, damp floors and poor provisions."[204] It has been speculated by modern scientists that his later illness arose from arsenic poisoning caused by copper arsenite in the wallpaper at Longwood House.[205]

With a small cadre of followers, Napoleon dictated his memoirs and grumbled about conditions. Lowe cut Napoleon's expenditure, ruled that no gifts were allowed if they mentioned his imperial status, and made his supporters sign a guarantee they would stay with the prisoner indefinitely.[206]

While in exile, Napoleon wrote a book about Julius Caesar, one of his great heroes.[207] He also studied English under the tutelage of Count Emmanuel de Las Cases with the main aim of being able to read English newspapers and books, as access to French newspapers and books was heavily restricted to him on Saint Helena.[208]

There were rumours of plots and even of his escape, but in reality no serious attempts were made.[209] For English poet Lord Byron, Napoleon was the epitome of the Romantic hero, the persecuted, lonely, and flawed genius.[210]

Death
Further information: Death mask of Napoleon and Retour des cendres

Bronze death mask of Napoleon I, modelled in 1821, cast in 1833
Napoleon's personal physician, Barry O'Meara, warned London that his declining state of health was mainly caused by the harsh treatment. Napoleon confined himself for months on end in his damp and wretched habitation of Longwood.[211]

In February 1821, Napoleon's health began to deteriorate rapidly, and he reconciled with the Catholic Church. He died on 5 May 1821, after confession, Extreme Unction and Viaticum in the presence of Father Ange Vignali. His last words were, France, l'armée, tête d'armée, Joséphine ("France, the army, head of the army, Joséphine").[212][213]

Napoleon's original death mask was created around 6 May, although it is not clear which doctor created it.[214][note 7] In his will, he had asked to be buried on the banks of the Seine, but the British governor said he should be buried on Saint Helena, in the Valley of the Willows.[212]


Napoleon's tomb at Les Invalides
In 1840, Louis Philippe I obtained permission from the British to return Napoleon's remains to France. On 15 December 1840, a state funeral was held. The hearse proceeded from the Arc de Triomphe down the Champs-Élysées, across the Place de la Concorde to the Esplanade des Invalides and then to the cupola in St Jérôme's Chapel, where it remained until the tomb designed by Louis Visconti was completed.

In 1861, Napoleon's remains were entombed in a porphyry stone sarcophagus in the crypt under the dome at Les Invalides.[216]

Cause of death
The cause of his death has been debated. Napoleon's physician, François Carlo Antommarchi, led the autopsy, which found the cause of death to be stomach cancer. Antommarchi did not sign the official report.[217] Napoleon's father had died of stomach cancer, although this was apparently unknown at the time of the autopsy.[218] Antommarchi found evidence of a stomach ulcer; this was the most convenient explanation for the British, who wanted to avoid criticism over their care of Napoleon.[212]

Gold-framed portrait painting of a gaunt middle-aged man with receding hair and laurel wreath, lying eyes-closed on white pillow with a white blanket covering to his neck and a gold Jesus cross resting on his chest
Napoleon on His Death Bed, by Horace Vernet, 1826
In 1955, the diaries of Napoleon's valet, Louis Marchand, were published. His description of Napoleon in the months before his death led Sten Forshufvud in a 1961 paper in Nature to put forward other causes for his death, including deliberate arsenic poisoning.[219] Arsenic was used as a poison during the era because it was undetectable when administered over a long period. Forshufvud, in a 1978 book with Ben Weider, noted that Napoleon's body was found to be well preserved when moved in 1840. Arsenic is a strong preservative, and therefore this supported the poisoning hypothesis. Forshufvud and Weider observed that Napoleon had attempted to quench abnormal thirst by drinking large amounts of orgeat syrup that contained cyanide compounds in the almonds used for flavouring.[219]

They maintained that the potassium tartrate used in his treatment prevented his stomach from expelling these compounds and that his thirst was a symptom of the poison. Their hypothesis was that the calomel given to Napoleon became an overdose, which killed him and left extensive tissue damage behind.[219] According to a 2007 article, the type of arsenic found in Napoleon's hair shafts was mineral, the most toxic, and according to toxicologist Patrick Kintz, this supported the conclusion that he was murdered.[220]

There have been modern studies that have supported the original autopsy finding.[220] In a 2008 study, researchers analysed samples of Napoleon's hair from throughout his life, as well as samples from his family and other contemporaries. All samples had high levels of arsenic, approximately 100 times higher than the current average. According to these researchers, Napoleon's body was already heavily contaminated with arsenic as a boy, and the high arsenic concentration in his hair was not caused by intentional poisoning; people were constantly exposed to arsenic from glues and dyes throughout their lives.[note 8] Studies published in 2007 and 2008 dismissed evidence of arsenic poisoning, and confirmed evidence of peptic ulcer and gastric cancer as the cause of death.[222]

Religion
Further information: Napoleon and the Catholic Church

Reorganisation of the religious geography: France is divided into 59 dioceses and 10 ecclesiastical provinces.
Napoleon's baptism took place in Ajaccio on 21 July 1771. He was piously raised as a Catholic but he never developed much faith.[223] As an adult, Napoleon was a deist. Napoleon's deity was an absent and distant God. However he had a keen appreciation of the power of organised religion in social and political affairs, and paid a great deal of attention to bending it to his purposes. He noted the influence of Catholicism's rituals and splendors.[223]

Napoleon had a civil marriage with Joséphine de Beauharnais, without religious ceremony. Napoleon was crowned Emperor on 2 December 1804 at Notre-Dame de Paris in a ceremony presided over by Pope Pius VII. On the eve of the Coronation ceremony, and at the insistence of Pope Pius VII, a private religious wedding ceremony of Napoleon and Joséphine was celebrated. Cardinal Fesch performed the wedding.[224] This marriage was annulled by tribunals under Napoleon's control in January 1810. On 1 April 1810, Napoleon married the Austrian princess Marie Louise in a Catholic ceremony. During his brother's rule in Spain, he abolished the Spanish Inquisition in 1813. Napoleon was excommunicated by the Catholic Church, but later reconciled with the Church before his death in 1821.[225]

Concordat
Further information: Concordat of 1801

Leaders of the Catholic Church taking the civil oath required by the Concordat
Seeking national reconciliation between revolutionaries and Catholics, the Concordat of 1801 was signed on 15 July 1801 between Napoleon and Pope Pius VII. It solidified the Roman Catholic Church as the majority church of France and brought back most of its civil status. The hostility of devout Catholics against the state had now largely been resolved. It did not restore the vast church lands and endowments that had been seized during the revolution and sold off. As a part of the Concordat, he presented another set of laws called the Organic Articles.[226][227]

While the Concordat restored much power to the papacy, the balance of church–state relations had tilted firmly in Napoleon's favour. He selected the bishops and supervised church finances. Napoleon and the pope both found the Concordat useful. Similar arrangements were made with the Church in territories controlled by Napoleon, especially Italy and Germany.[228] Now, Napoleon could win favor with the Catholics while also controlling Rome in a political sense. Napoleon said in April 1801, "Skillful conquerors have not got entangled with priests. They can both contain them and use them". French children were issued a catechism that taught them to love and respect Napoleon.[229]

Arrest of Pope Pius VII
In 1809, under Napoleon's orders, Pope Pius VII was placed under arrest in Italy, and in 1812 the prisoner Pontiff was transferred to France, being held in the Palace of Fontainebleau.[230] Because the arrest was made in a clandestine manner, some sources[231][230] describe it as a kidnapping. The Pope was only released in 1814 when the Allies invaded France. In January 1813, Napoleon personally forced the Pope to sign a humiliating "Concordat of Fontainebleau".[232] The 1813 document was later repudiated by the Pontiff.[233]

Religious emancipation
Further information: Napoleon and the Jews and Napoleon and Protestants
Napoleon emancipated Jews, as well as Protestants in Catholic countries and Catholics in Protestant countries, from laws which restricted them to ghettos, and he expanded their rights to property, worship, and careers. Despite the anti-semitic reaction to Napoleon's policies from foreign governments and within France, he believed emancipation would benefit France by attracting Jews to the country given the restrictions they faced elsewhere.[234]

In 1806 an Assembly of Jewish notables was gathered by Napoleon to discuss 12 questions broadly dealing with the relations between Jews, Christians and other issues dealing with the Jewish ability to integrate into the general French society. Later, after the questions were answered in a satisfactory way according to the Emperor, a "great Sanhedrin" was brought together to transform the answers into decisions that would form the basis of the future status of the Jews in France and the rest of the Empire Napoleon was building.[235]

He stated, "I will never accept any proposals that will obligate the Jewish people to leave France, because to me the Jews are the same as any other citizen in our country. It takes weakness to chase them out of the country, but it takes strength to assimilate them".[236] He was seen as so favourable to the Jews that the Russian Orthodox Church formally condemned him as "Antichrist and the Enemy of God".[237]

One year after the final meeting of the Sanhedrin, on 17 March 1808, Napoleon placed the Jews on probation. Several new laws restricting the citizenship the Jews had been offered 17 years previously were instituted at that time. However, despite pressure from leaders of a number of Christian communities to refrain from granting Jews emancipation, within one year of the issue of the new restrictions, they were once again lifted in response to the appeal of Jews from all over France.[235]

Personality

Napoleon visiting the Palais Royal for the opening of the 8th session of the Tribunat in 1807, by Merry-Joseph Blondel
Historians emphasize the strength of the ambition that took Napoleon from an obscure village to command of most of Europe.[238] In-depth academic studies about his early life conclude that up until age 2, he had a "gentle disposition".[31] His older brother, Joseph, frequently received their mother's attention which made Napoleon more assertive and approval-driven. During his early schooling years he would be harshly bullied by classmates for his Corsican identity and control of the French language. To withstand the stress he became domineering, eventually developing an inferiority complex.[31]

George F. E. Rudé stresses his "rare combination of will, intellect and physical vigour".[239] In one-on-one situations he typically had a hypnotic effect on people, seemingly bending the strongest leaders to his will.[240] He understood military technology, but was not an innovator in that regard.[241] He was an innovator in using the financial, bureaucratic, and diplomatic resources of France. He could rapidly dictate a series of complex commands to his subordinates, keeping in mind where major units were expected to be at each future point, and like a chess master, "seeing" the best plays moves ahead.[242]

Napoleon maintained strict, efficient work habits, prioritizing what needed to be done. He cheated at cards, but repaid the losses; he had to win at everything he attempted.[243] He kept relays of staff and secretaries at work. Unlike many generals, Napoleon did not examine history to ask what Hannibal or Alexander or anyone else did in a similar situation. Critics said he won many battles simply because of luck; Napoleon responded, "Give me lucky generals", aware that "luck" comes to leaders who recognize opportunity, and seize it.[244] Dwyer states that Napoleon's victories at Austerlitz and Jena in 1805–06 heightened his sense of self-grandiosity, leaving him even more certain of his destiny and invincibility.[245]

In terms of influence on events, it was more than Napoleon's personality that took effect. He reorganized France itself to supply the men and money needed for wars.[246] He inspired his men—Wellington said his presence on the battlefield was worth 40,000 soldiers, for he inspired confidence from privates to field marshals.[247] He also unnerved the enemy. At the Battle of Auerstadt in 1806, King Frederick William III of Prussia outnumbered the French by 63,000 to 27,000; however, when he was told, mistakenly, that Napoleon was in command, he ordered a hasty retreat that turned into a rout.[248] The force of his personality neutralized material difficulties as his soldiers fought with the confidence that with Napoleon in charge they would surely win.[249]

Image
Further information: Cultural depictions of Napoleon

Napoleon is often represented in his green colonel uniform of the Chasseur à Cheval of the Imperial Guard, the regiment that often served as his personal escort, with a large bicorne and a hand-in-waistcoat gesture.
Napoleon has become a worldwide cultural icon who symbolises military genius and political power. Martin van Creveld described him as "the most competent human being who ever lived".[250] Since his death, many towns, streets, ships, and even cartoon characters have been named after him. He has been portrayed in hundreds of films and discussed in hundreds of thousands of books and articles.[251]

When met in person, many of his contemporaries were surprised by his apparently unremarkable physical appearance in contrast to his significant deeds and reputation, especially in his youth, when he was consistently described as small and thin. Joseph Farington, who observed Napoleon personally in 1802, commented that "Samuel Rogers stood a little way from me and ... seemed to be disappointed in the look of [Napoleon's] countenance [face] and said it was that of a little Italian." Farington said Napoleon's eyes were "lighter, and more of a grey, than I should have expected from his complexion", that "His person is below middle size", and that "his general aspect was milder than I had before thought it."[252]

A personal friend of Napoleon's said that when he first met him in Brienne-le-Château as a young man, Napoleon was only notable "for the dark color of his complexion, for his piercing and scrutinising glance, and for the style of his conversation"; he also said that Napoleon was personally a serious and somber man: "his conversation bore the appearance of ill-humor, and he was certainly not very amiable."[253] Johann Ludwig Wurstemberger, who accompanied Napoleon from Camp Fornio in 1797 and on the Swiss campaign of 1798, noted that "Bonaparte was rather slight and emaciated-looking; his face, too, was very thin, with a dark complexion ... his black, unpowdered hair hung down evenly over both shoulders", but that, despite his slight and unkempt appearance, "His looks and expression were earnest and powerful."[254]

Denis Davydov met him personally and considered him remarkably average in appearance: "His face was slightly swarthy, with regular features. His nose was not very large, but straight, with a slight, hardly noticeable bend. The hair on his head was dark reddish-blond; his eyebrows and eyelashes were much darker than the colour of his hair, and his blue eyes, set off by the almost black lashes, gave him a most pleasing expression ... The man I saw was of short stature, just over five feet tall, rather heavy although he was only 37 years old."[255]


Napoleon's death mask. Musée de l'Armée, Paris
During the Napoleonic Wars he was taken seriously by the British press as a dangerous tyrant, poised to invade. Napoleon was mocked in British newspapers as a short tempered small man and he was nicknamed "Little Boney in a strong fit".[256] A nursery rhyme warned children that Bonaparte ravenously ate naughty people; the "bogeyman".[257] At 5 feet 2 inches (1.57 m), he was the height of an average French male but short for an aristocrat or officer (part of why he was assigned to the artillery, since at the time the infantry and cavalry required more commanding figures).[258] It is possible he was taller at 5 feet 7 inches (1.70 m) due to the difference in the French measurement of inches.[259]

Some historians believe that the reason for the mistake about his size at death came from use of an obsolete old French yardstick (a French foot equals 33 cm, while an English foot equals 30.47 cm).[258] Napoleon was a champion of the metric system and had no use for the old yardsticks. It is more likely that he was 5 feet 2 inches (1.57 m), the height he was measured at on St. Helena (a British island), since he would have most likely been measured with an English yardstick rather than a yardstick of the Old French Regime.[258] Napoleon surrounded himself with tall bodyguards and was affectionately nicknamed le petit caporal (the little corporal), reflecting his reported camaraderie with his soldiers rather than his height.

When he became First Consul and later Emperor, Napoleon eschewed his general's uniform and habitually wore the green colonel uniform (non-Hussar) of a colonel of the Chasseur à Cheval of the Imperial Guard, the regiment that served as his personal escort many times, with a large bicorne. He also habitually wore (usually on Sundays) the blue uniform of a colonel of the Imperial Guard Foot Grenadiers (blue with white facings and red cuffs). He also wore his Légion d'honneur star, medal and ribbon, and the Order of the Iron Crown decorations, white French-style culottes and white stockings. This was in contrast to the complex uniforms with many decorations of his marshals and those around him.

In his later years he gained quite a bit of weight and had a complexion considered pale or sallow, something contemporaries took note of. Novelist Paul de Kock, who saw him in 1811 on the balcony of the Tuileries, called Napoleon "yellow, obese, and bloated".[260] A British captain who met him in 1815 stated "I felt very much disappointed, as I believe everyone else did, in his appearance ... He is fat, rather what we call pot-bellied, and although his leg is well shaped, it is rather clumsy ... He is very sallow, with light grey eyes, and rather thin, greasy-looking brown hair, and altogether a very nasty, priestlike-looking fellow."[261]

The stock character of Napoleon is a comically short "petty tyrant" and this has become a cliché in popular culture. He is often portrayed wearing a large bicorne hat with a hand-in-waistcoat gesture—a reference to the painting produced in 1812 by Jacques-Louis David.[262] In 1908 Alfred Adler, a psychologist, cited Napoleon to describe an inferiority complex in which short people adopt an over-aggressive behaviour to compensate for lack of height; this inspired the term Napoleon complex.[263]

Reforms

First remittance of the Légion d'Honneur, 15 July 1804, at Saint-Louis des Invalides, by Jean-Baptiste Debret (1812)
Napoleon instituted various reforms, such as higher education, a tax code, road and sewer systems, and established the Banque de France, the first central bank in French history. He negotiated the Concordat of 1801 with the Catholic Church, which sought to reconcile the mostly Catholic population to his regime. It was presented alongside the Organic Articles, which regulated public worship in France. He dissolved the Holy Roman Empire prior to German Unification later in the 19th century. The sale of the Louisiana Territory to the United States doubled the size of the United States.[264]

In May 1802, he instituted the Legion of Honour, a substitute for the old royalist decorations and orders of chivalry, to encourage civilian and military achievements; the order is still the highest decoration in France.[265]

Napoleonic Code
Main article: Napoleonic Code
Page of French writing
First page of the 1804 original edition of the Code Civil
Napoleon's set of civil laws, the Code Civil—now often known as the Napoleonic Code—was prepared by committees of legal experts under the supervision of Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérès, the Second Consul. Napoleon participated actively in the sessions of the Council of State that revised the drafts. The development of the code was a fundamental change in the nature of the civil law legal system with its stress on clearly written and accessible law. Other codes ("Les cinq codes") were commissioned by Napoleon to codify criminal and commerce law; a Code of Criminal Instruction was published, which enacted rules of due process.[266]

The Napoleonic code was adopted throughout much of Continental Europe, though only in the lands he conquered, and remained in force after Napoleon's defeat. Napoleon said: "My true glory is not to have won forty battles ... Waterloo will erase the memory of so many victories. ... But ... what will live forever, is my Civil Code".[267] The Code influences a quarter of the world's jurisdictions such as that of in Continental Europe, the Americas and Africa.[268]

Dieter Langewiesche described the code as a "revolutionary project" which spurred the development of bourgeois society in Germany by the extension of the right to own property and an acceleration towards the end of feudalism. Napoleon reorganised what had been the Holy Roman Empire, made up of more than a thousand entities,[quantify] into a more streamlined forty-state Confederation of the Rhine; this helped promote the German Confederation and the unification of Germany in 1871.[269]

The movement toward national unification in Italy was similarly precipitated by Napoleonic rule.[270] These changes contributed to the development of nationalism and the nation state.[271]

Napoleon implemented a wide array of liberal reforms in France and across Continental Europe, especially in Italy and Germany, as summarized by British historian Andrew Roberts:

The ideas that underpin our modern world—meritocracy, equality before the law, property rights, religious toleration, modern secular education, sound finances, and so on—were championed, consolidated, codified and geographically extended by Napoleon. To them he added a rational and efficient local administration, an end to rural banditry, the encouragement of science and the arts, the abolition of feudalism and the greatest codification of laws since the fall of the Roman Empire.[272]

Napoleon directly overthrew remnants of feudalism in much of western Continental Europe. He liberalised property laws, ended seigneurial dues, abolished the guild of merchants and craftsmen to facilitate entrepreneurship, legalised divorce, closed the Jewish ghettos and made Jews equal to everyone else. The Inquisition ended as did the Holy Roman Empire. The power of church courts and religious authority was sharply reduced and equality under the law was proclaimed for all men.[273]

Warfare
Further information: Napoleonic weaponry and warfare and Military career of Napoleon Bonaparte
Photo of a grey and phosphorous-coloured equestrian statue. Napoleon is seated on the horse, which is rearing up, he looks forward with his right hand raised and pointing forward; his left hand holds the reins.
Statue in Cherbourg-Octeville unveiled by Napoleon III in 1858. Napoleon I strengthened the town's defences to prevent British naval incursions.
In the field of military organisation, Napoleon borrowed from previous theorists such as Jacques Antoine Hippolyte, Comte de Guibert, and from the reforms of preceding French governments, and then developed much of what was already in place. He continued the policy, which emerged from the Revolution, of promotion based primarily on merit.[274]

Corps replaced divisions as the largest army units, mobile artillery was integrated into reserve batteries, the staff system became more fluid and cavalry returned as an important formation in French military doctrine. These methods are now referred to as essential features of Napoleonic warfare.[274] Though he consolidated the practice of modern conscription introduced by the Directory, one of the restored monarchy's first acts was to end it.[275]

His opponents learned from Napoleon's innovations. The increased importance of artillery after 1807 stemmed from his creation of a highly mobile artillery force, the growth in artillery numbers, and changes in artillery practices. As a result of these factors, Napoleon, rather than relying on infantry to wear away the enemy's defenses, now could use massed artillery as a spearhead to pound a break in the enemy's line that was then exploited by supporting infantry and cavalry. McConachy rejects the alternative theory that growing reliance on artillery by the French army beginning in 1807 was an outgrowth of the declining quality of the French infantry and, later, France's inferiority in cavalry numbers.[276] Weapons and other kinds of military technology remained static through the Revolutionary and Napoleonic eras, but 18th-century operational mobility underwent change.[277]

Napoleon's biggest influence was in the conduct of warfare. Antoine-Henri Jomini explained Napoleon's methods in a widely used textbook that influenced all European and American armies.[278] Napoleon was regarded by the influential military theorist Carl von Clausewitz as a genius in the operational art of war, and historians rank him as a great military commander.[279] Wellington, when asked who was the greatest general of the day, answered: "In this age, in past ages, in any age, Napoleon".[280]

Under Napoleon, a new emphasis towards the destruction, not just outmanoeuvring, of enemy armies emerged. Invasions of enemy territory occurred over broader fronts which made wars costlier and more decisive. The political effect of war increased; defeat for a European power meant more than the loss of isolated enclaves. Near-Carthaginian peaces intertwined whole national efforts, intensifying the Revolutionary phenomenon of total war.[281]

Metric system
Main articles: History of the metric system, Mesures usuelles, and Units of measurement in France
Depicted as First Consul on the 1803 20 gold Napoléon gold coin
Depicted as First Consul on the 1803 20 gold Napoléon gold coin
The official introduction of the metric system in September 1799 was unpopular in large sections of French society. Napoleon's rule greatly aided adoption of the new standard not only across France but also across the French sphere of influence. Napoleon took a retrograde step in 1812 when he passed legislation to introduce the mesures usuelles (traditional units of measurement) for retail trade,[282] a system of measure that resembled the pre-revolutionary units but were based on the kilogram and the metre; for example, the livre metrique (metric pound) was 500 g,[283] in contrast to the value of the livre du roi (the king's pound), 489.5 g.[284] Other units of measure were rounded in a similar manner prior to the definitive introduction of the metric system across parts of Europe in the middle of the 19th century.[285]

Education
Napoleon's educational reforms laid the foundation of a modern system of education in France and throughout much of Europe.[286] Napoleon synthesized the best academic elements from the Ancien Régime, The Enlightenment, and the Revolution, with the aim of establishing a stable, well-educated and prosperous society. He made French the only official language. He left some primary education in the hands of religious orders, but he offered public support to secondary education. Napoleon founded a number of state secondary schools (lycées) designed to produce a standardized education that was uniform across France.[287]

All students were taught the sciences along with modern and classical languages. Unlike the system during the Ancien Régime, religious topics did not dominate the curriculum, although they were present with the teachers from the clergy. Napoleon hoped to use religion to produce social stability.[288] He gave special attention to the advanced centers, such as the École Polytechnique, that provided both military expertise and state-of-the-art research in science.[289] Napoleon made some of the first efforts at establishing a system of secular and public education.[when?] The system featured scholarships and strict discipline, with the result being a French educational system that outperformed its European counterparts, many of which borrowed from the French system.[290]

Memory and evaluation
Criticism

The Third of May 1808 by Francisco Goya, showing Spanish resisters being executed by Napoleon's troops.
In the political realm, historians debate whether Napoleon was "an enlightened despot who laid the foundations of modern Europe or, instead, a megalomaniac who wrought greater misery than any man before the coming of Hitler".[291] Many historians have concluded that he had grandiose foreign policy ambitions. The Continental powers as late as 1808 were willing to give him nearly all of his gains and titles, but some scholars maintain he was overly aggressive and pushed for too much, until his empire collapsed.[292][293]

Napoleon ended lawlessness and disorder in post-Revolutionary France.[294] He was considered a tyrant and usurper by his opponents.[295] His critics[who?] charge that he was not troubled when faced with the prospect of war and death for thousands, turned his search for undisputed rule into a series of conflicts throughout Europe and ignored treaties and conventions alike. His role in the Haitian Revolution and decision to reinstate slavery in France's overseas colonies are controversial and affect his reputation.[296]

Napoleon institutionalised plunder of conquered territories: French museums contain art stolen by Napoleon's forces from across Europe. Artefacts were brought to the Musée du Louvre for a grand central museum; his example would later serve as inspiration for more notorious imitators.[297] He was compared to Adolf Hitler most famously by the historian Pieter Geyl in 1947[298] and Claude Ribbe in 2005.[299] David G. Chandler, a foremost historian of Napoleonic warfare, wrote in 1973 that, "Nothing could be more degrading to the former [Napoleon] and more flattering to the latter [Hitler]. The comparison is odious. On the whole Napoleon was inspired by a noble dream, wholly dissimilar from Hitler's ... Napoleon left great and lasting testimonies to his genius—in codes of law and national identities which survive to the present day. Adolf Hitler left nothing but destruction."[300]

Critics argue Napoleon's true legacy must reflect the loss of status for France and needless deaths brought by his rule: historian Victor Davis Hanson writes, "After all, the military record is unquestioned—17 years of wars, perhaps six million Europeans dead, France bankrupt, her overseas colonies lost."[301] McLynn states that, "He can be viewed as the man who set back European economic life for a generation by the dislocating impact of his wars."[295] Vincent Cronin replies that such criticism relies on the flawed premise that Napoleon was responsible for the wars which bear his name, when in fact France was the victim of a series of coalitions which aimed to destroy the ideals of the Revolution.[302]

British military historian Correlli Barnett calls him 'a social misfit' who exploited France for his personal megalomaniac goals. He says Napoleon's reputation is exaggerated.[303] French scholar Jean Tulard provided an influential account of his image as a savior.[304] Louis Bergeron has praised the numerous changes he made to French society, especially regarding the law as well as education.[305] His greatest failure was the Russian invasion. Many historians have blamed Napoleon's poor planning, but Russian scholars instead emphasize the Russian response, noting the notorious winter weather was just as hard on the defenders.[306]

The large and growing historiography in French, English, Russian, Spanish and other languages has been summarized and evaluated by numerous scholars.[307][308][309]

Propaganda and memory
Main article: Napoleonic propaganda

Napoleon Crossing the Alps, romantic version by Jacques-Louis David in 1805

Bonaparte Crossing the Alps, realist version by Paul Delaroche in 1848
Napoleon's use of propaganda contributed to his rise to power, legitimated his régime, and established his image for posterity. Strict censorship, controlling aspects of the press, books, theater, and art, was part of his propaganda scheme, aimed at portraying him as bringing desperately wanted peace and stability to France. The propagandistic rhetoric changed in relation to events and to the atmosphere of Napoleon's reign, focusing first on his role as a general in the army and identification as a soldier, and moving to his role as emperor and a civil leader. Specifically targeting his civilian audience, Napoleon fostered a relationship with the contemporary art community, taking an active role in commissioning and controlling different forms of art production to suit his propaganda goals.[310]

In England, Russia and across Europe—though not in France—Napoleon was a popular topic of caricature.[311][312][313]

Hazareesingh (2004) explores how Napoleon's image and memory are best understood. They played a key role in collective political defiance of the Bourbon restoration monarchy in 1815–1830. People from different walks of life and areas of France, particularly Napoleonic veterans, drew on the Napoleonic legacy and its connections with the ideals of the 1789 revolution.[314]

Widespread rumors of Napoleon's return from St. Helena and Napoleon as an inspiration for patriotism, individual and collective liberties, and political mobilization manifested themselves in seditious materials, displaying the tricolor and rosettes. There were also subversive activities celebrating anniversaries of Napoleon's life and reign and disrupting royal celebrations—they demonstrated the prevailing and successful goal of the varied supporters of Napoleon to constantly destabilize the Bourbon regime.[314]

Datta (2005) shows that, following the collapse of militaristic Boulangism in the late 1880s, the Napoleonic legend was divorced from party politics and revived in popular culture. Concentrating on two plays and two novels from the period—Victorien Sardou's Madame Sans-Gêne (1893), Maurice Barrès's Les Déracinés (1897), Edmond Rostand's L'Aiglon (1900), and André de Lorde and Gyp's Napoléonette (1913)—Datta examines how writers and critics of the Belle Époque exploited the Napoleonic legend for diverse political and cultural ends.[315]

Reduced to a minor character, the new fictional Napoleon became not a world historical figure but an intimate one, fashioned by individuals' needs and consumed as popular entertainment. In their attempts to represent the emperor as a figure of national unity, proponents and detractors of the Third Republic used the legend as a vehicle for exploring anxieties about gender and fears about the processes of democratization that accompanied this new era of mass politics and culture.[315]

International Napoleonic Congresses take place regularly, with participation by members of the French and American military, French politicians and scholars from different countries.[316] In January 2012, the mayor of Montereau-Fault-Yonne, near Paris—the site of a late victory of Napoleon—proposed development of Napoleon's Bivouac, a commemorative theme park at a projected cost of 200 million euros.[317]

Long-term influence outside France
Main article: Influence of the French Revolution

Bas-relief of Napoleon I in the chamber of the United States House of Representatives
Napoleon was responsible for spreading the values of the French Revolution to other countries, especially in legal reform and the abolition of serfdom.[318]

After the fall of Napoleon, not only was the Napoleonic Code retained by conquered countries including the Netherlands, Belgium, parts of Italy and Germany, but has been used as the basis of certain parts of law outside Europe including the Dominican Republic, the US state of Louisiana and the Canadian province of Quebec.[319] The memory of Napoleon in Poland is favorable, for his support for independence and opposition to Russia, his legal code, the abolition of serfdom, and the introduction of modern middle class bureaucracies.[320]

Napoleon could be considered one of the founders of modern Germany. After dissolving the Holy Roman Empire, he reduced the number of German states from 300 to less than 50, prior to German Unification. A byproduct of the French occupation was a strong development in German nationalism. Napoleon also significantly aided the United States when he agreed to sell the territory of Louisiana for 15 million dollars during the presidency of Thomas Jefferson. That territory almost doubled the size of the United States, adding the equivalent of 13 states to the Union.[321]

Marriages and children
Napoleon's first wife, Joséphine, Empress of the French, painted by François Gérard, 1801
Napoleon's first wife, Joséphine
Empress Marie-Louise and the King of Rome, by Joseph Franque, 1812.
Napoleon's second wife, Marie-Louise
Napoleon married Joséphine de Beauharnais in 1796, when he was 26; she was a 32-year-old widow whose first husband had been executed during the Revolution. Five days after Joséphine's first husband’s death, the Reign of Terror initiator Maximilien de Robespierre was executed, and, with the help of high-placed friends, Joséphine was freed. [322] Until she met Bonaparte, she had been known as "Rose", a name which he disliked. He called her "Joséphine" instead, and she went by this name henceforth. Bonaparte often sent her love letters while on his campaigns.[323] He formally adopted her son Eugène and second cousin (via marriage) Stéphanie and arranged dynastic marriages for them. Joséphine had her daughter Hortense marry Napoleon's brother Louis.[324]

Joséphine had lovers, such as Lieutenant Hippolyte Charles, during Napoleon's Italian campaign.[325] Napoleon learnt of that affair and a letter he wrote about it was intercepted by the British and published widely, to embarrass Napoleon. Napoleon had his own affairs too: during the Egyptian campaign he took Pauline Bellisle Foures, the wife of a junior officer, as his mistress. She became known as "Cleopatra".[326][note 9]

While Napoleon's mistresses had children by him, Joséphine did not produce an heir, possibly because of either the stresses of her imprisonment during the Reign of Terror or an abortion she may have had in her twenties.[328] Napoleon chose divorce so he could remarry in search of an heir. Despite his divorce from Josephine, Napoleon showed his dedication to her for the rest of his life. When he heard the news of her death while on exile in Elba, he locked himself in his room and would not come out for two full days.[194] Her name would also be his final word on his deathbed in 1821.

On 11 March 1810 by proxy, he married the 19-year-old Marie Louise, Archduchess of Austria, and a great niece of Marie Antoinette. Thus he had married into a German royal and imperial family.[329] Louise was less than happy with the arrangement, at least at first, stating: "Just to see the man would be the worst form of torture". Her great-aunt had been executed in France, while Napoleon had fought numerous campaigns against Austria all throughout his military career. However, she seemed to warm up to him over time. After her wedding, she wrote to her father: "He loves me very much. I respond to his love sincerely. There is something very fetching and very eager about him that is impossible to resist".[194]

Napoleon and Marie Louise remained married until his death, though she did not join him in exile on Elba and thereafter never saw her husband again. The couple had one child, Napoleon Francis Joseph Charles (1811–1832), known from birth as the King of Rome. He became Napoleon II in 1814 and reigned for only two weeks. He was awarded the title of the Duke of Reichstadt in 1818 and died of tuberculosis aged 21, with no children.[329]

Napoleon acknowledged one illegitimate son: Charles Léon (1806–1881) by Eléonore Denuelle de La Plaigne.[330] Alexandre Colonna-Walewski (1810–1868), the son of his mistress Maria Walewska, although acknowledged by Walewska's husband, was also widely known to be his child, and the DNA of his direct male descendant has been used to help confirm Napoleon's Y-chromosome haplotype.[331] He may have had further unacknowledged illegitimate offspring as well, such as Eugen Megerle von Mühlfeld by Emilie Victoria Kraus[332] and Hélène Napoleone Bonaparte (1816–1907) by Albine de Montholon.

Titles, styles, honours, and arms
Main article: Titles and styles of Napoleon
Ancestry
Napoleon's ancestry[333]
See also
	Napoleon portal
Arenenberg
Notes
 He established a system of public education,[4] abolished the vestiges of feudalism,[5] emancipated Jews and other religious minorities,[6] abolished the Spanish Inquisition,[7] enacted legal protections for an emerging middle class,[8] and centralized state power at the expense of religious authorities.[9]
 The first known record of him signing his name as Bonaparte was when he was 27 (in 1796).[15][13][16] In his youth, his name was also spelled as Nabulione, Nabulio, Napolionne, and Napulione.[17]
 Although the 1768 Treaty of Versailles formally ceded Corsica's rights, it remained un-incorporated during 1769[19] until it became a province of France in 1770.[20] Corsica would be legally integrated as a département in 1789.[21][22]
 Aside from his name, there does not appear to be a connection between him and Napoleon's theorem.[35]
 He was mainly referred to as Bonaparte until he became First Consul for life.[39]
 This is depicted in Bonaparte Crossing the Alps by Hippolyte Delaroche and in Jacques-Louis David's imperial Napoleon Crossing the Alps. He is less realistically portrayed on a charger in the latter work.[93]
 It was customary to cast a death mask of a leader. At least four genuine death masks of Napoleon are known to exist: one in The Cabildo in New Orleans, one in a Liverpool museum, another in Havana and one in the library of the University of North Carolina.[215]
 The body can tolerate large doses of arsenic if ingested regularly, and arsenic was a fashionable cure-all.[221]
 One night, during an illicit liaison with the actress Marguerite George, Napoleon had a major fit. This and other more minor attacks have led historians to debate whether he had epilepsy and, if so, to what extent.[327]
Citations
 "Napoleon", "Bonaparte". Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
 Roberts, Andrew. Napoleon: A Life. Penguin Group, 2014, Introduction.
 Charles Messenger, ed. (2001). Reader's Guide to Military History. Routledge. pp. 391–427. ISBN 978-1-135-95970-8. Archived from the original on 22 October 2015.
 Grab 2003, p. 56.
 Broers, M. and Hicks, P. The Napoleonic Empire and the New European Political Culture. Palgrave Macmillan, 2012, p. 230
 Conner, S. P. The Age of Napoleon. Greenwood Publishing Group, 2004, pp. 38–40.
 Perez, Joseph. The Spanish Inquisition: A History. Yale University Press, 2005, p. 98
 Fremont-Barnes, G. and Fisher, T. The Napoleonic Wars: The Rise and Fall of an Empire. Osprey Publishing, 2004, p. 336
 Grab, A. Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe. Palgrave Macmillan, 2003, Conclusion.
 Andrew Roberts, Napoleon: A Life (2014), p. xxxiii.
 McLynn 1998, p. 2
 2012 DNA tests found that some of the family's ancestors were from the Caucasus region; "Le Figaro – Mon Figaro : Selon son ADN, les ancêtres de Napoléon seraient du Caucase!". Le Figaro. 15 January 2012. Archived from the original on 10 February 2012. Retrieved 20 February 2012.; The study found haplogroup type E1b1c1*, which originated in Northern Africa circa 1200 BC; the people migrated into the Caucasus and into Europe. Lucotte, Gerard; Thomasset, Thierry; Hrechdakian, Peter (December 2011). "Haplogroup of the Y Chromosome of Napoléon the First; Gerard Lucotte, Thierry Thomasset, Peter Hrechdakian; Journal of Molecular Biology Research". Journal of Molecular Biology Research. 1. doi:10.5539/jmbr.v1n1p12.
 Dwyer 2008, ch 1
 "6 Things You Should Know About Napoleon". History.com. Archived from the original on 1 July 2017. Retrieved 23 January 2018.
 Roberts, Andrew (2011). Napoleon: A Life. Penguin. ISBN 978-0698176287.
 "Napoleon I | Biography, Achievements, & Facts". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 12 January 2018. Retrieved 23 January 2018.
 Dwyer 2008, p. xv
 Encyclopædia Britannica. "Genoa-Italy". Britannica.com. Archived from the original on 30 July 2017. Retrieved 16 February 2018.
 McLynn 1998, p. 6
 McLynn 1998, p. 20
 "Corsica | History, Geography, & Points of Interest". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 28 November 2017. Retrieved 23 January 2018.
 Roberts, Andrew (2014). Napoleon: A Life. Penguin. ISBN 978-0698176287. Archived from the original on 25 February 2018.
 Cronin 1994, pp. 20–21
 Cronin 1994, pp. 20–21
 Chamberlain, Alexander (1896). The Child and Childhood in Folk Thought: (The Child in Primative Culture), p. 385. MacMillan.
 Cronin 1994, p. 27
 International School History (8 February 2012), Napoleon's Rise to Power, archived from the original on 8 May 2015, retrieved 29 January 2018
 Johnson, Paul (2006). Napoleon: A Life. Penguin. ISBN 978-0143037453. Archived from the original on 25 February 2018.
 Roberts 2001, p. xvi
 Roberts, Andrew (4 November 2011). Napoleon: A Life. Penguin. ISBN 9780698176287.
 Parker, Harold T. (1971). "The Formation of Napoleon's Personality: An Exploratory Essay". French Historical Studies. 7 (1): 6–26. doi:10.2307/286104. JSTOR 286104.
 Adams, Michael (2014). Napoleon and Russia. A&C Black. ISBN 978-0826442123. Archived from the original on 25 February 2018.
 Roberts, Andrew (2014). Napoleon: A Life. Penguin. p. 11. ISBN 978-0698176287. ...having mastered [basic] French in April 1779, four months shy of his 10th birthday...
 McLynn 1998, p. 18
 Wells 1992, p. 74
 McLynn 1998, p. 21
 Dwyer 2008, p. 42
 McLynn 1998, p. 26
 McLynn 1998, p. 290
 McLynn 1998, p. 37
 David Nicholls (1999). Napoleon: A Biographical Companion. ABC-CLIO. p. 131. ISBN 978-0874369571. Archived from the original on 25 February 2018.
 McLynn 1998, p. 55
 McLynn 1998, p. 61
 Roberts 2001, p. xviii
 Dwyer 2008, p. 132
 McLynn 1998, p. 76
 Chandler 1973, p. 30
 Patrice Gueniffey, Bonaparte: 1769–1802 (Harvard UP, 2015), pp. 137–59.
 Bourrienne, Memoirs of Napoleon, p. 39
 Bourrienne, Memoirs of Napoleon, p. 38
 Dwyer 2008, p. 157
 McLynn 1998, pp. 76, 84
 McLynn 1998, p. 92
 Dwyer 2008, p. 26
 Dwyer 2008, p. 164
 McLynn 1998, p. 93
 McLynn 1998, p. 96
 Johnson 2002, p. 27
 Carlyle, Thomas (1896). "The works of Thomas Carlyle – The French Revolution, vol. III, book 3.VII". Archived from the original on 20 March 2015.
 Englund (2010) pp. 92–94
 Bell 2015, p. 29.
 Dwyer 2008, pp. 284–85
 McLynn 1998, p. 132
 McLynn 1998, p. 145
 McLynn 1998, p. 142
 Harvey 2006, p. 179
 McLynn 1998, p. 135
 Dwyer 2008, p. 306
 Dwyer 2008, p. 305
 Bell 2015, p. 30.
 Dwyer 2008, p. 322
 Watson 2003, pp. 13–14
 Amini 2000, p. 12
 Dwyer 2008, p. 342
 Englund (2010) pp. 127–28
 McLynn 1998, p. 175
 McLynn 1998, p. 179
 Dwyer 2008, p. 372
 Roberts 2001, p. xx
 Dwyer 2008, p. 392
 Dwyer 2008, pp. 411–24
 McLynn 1998, p. 189
 Gueniffey, Bonaparte: 1769–1802 pp. 500–02.
 Dwyer 2008, p. 442
 Connelly 2006, p. 57
 Dwyer 2008, p. 444
 Dwyer 2008, p. 455
 François Furet, The French Revolution, 1770–1814 (1996), p. 212
 Georges Lefebvre, Napoleon from 18 Brumaire to Tilsit 1799–1807 (1969), pp. 60–68
 Lyons 1994, p. 111
 Lefebvre, Napoleon from 18 Brumaire to Tilsit 1799–1807 (1969), pp. 71–92
 Holt, Lucius Hudson; Chilton, Alexander Wheeler (1919). A Brief History of Europe from 1789–1815. Macmillan. Archived from the original on 4 May 2016.
 Chandler 2002, p. 51
 Chandler 1966, pp. 279–81
 McLynn 1998, p. 235
 Chandler 1966, p. 292
 Chandler 1966, p. 293
 Chandler 1966, p. 296
 Chandler 1966, pp. 298–304
 Chandler 1966, p. 301
 Schom 1997, p. 302
 Lyons 1994, pp. 111–14
 Lyons 1994, p. 113
 Edwards 1999, p. 55
 Roberts, Andrew. Napoleon: A Life. Penguin Group, 2014, p. 301
 Roberts, Andrew. Napoleon: A Life. Penguin Group, 2014, p. 303
 Connelly 2006, p. 70
 R.B. Mowat, The Diplomacy of Napoleon (1924) is a survey online; for a recent advanced diplomatic history, see Paul W. Schroeder, The Transformation of European Politics 1763–1848 (Oxford U.P. 1996) pp. 177–560
 McLynn 1998, p. 265
 McLynn 1998, p. 243
 McLynn 1998, p. 296
 McLynn 1998, p. 297
 De Rémusat, Claire Elisabeth, Memoirs of Madame De Rémusat, 1802–1808 Volume 1, HardPress Publishing, 2012, 542 pp., ISBN 978-1290517478.
 Roberts, Andrew. Napoleon: A Life. Penguin Group, 2014, p. 355.
 Paul W. Schroeder, The Transformation of European Politics 1763–1848 (1996) pp. 231–86
 Chandler 1966, p. 328. Meanwhile, French territorial rearrangements in Germany occurred without Russian consultation and Napoleon's annexations in the Po valley increasingly strained relations between the two.
 Chandler 1966, p. 331
 Chandler 1966, p. 323
 Chandler 1966, p. 332
 Chandler 1966, p. 333
 Michael J. Hughes, Forging Napoleon's Grande Armée: Motivation, Military Culture, and Masculinity in the French Army, 1800–1808 (NYU Press, 2012).
 McLynn 1998, p. 321
 McLynn 1998, p. 332
 Richard Brooks (editor), Atlas of World Military History. p. 108
 Andrew Uffindell, Great Generals of the Napoleonic Wars. p. 15
 Richard Brooks (editor), Atlas of World Military History. p. 156.
 Richard Brooks (editor), Atlas of World Military History. p. 156. "It is a historical cliché to compare the Schlieffen Plan with Hannibal's tactical envelopment at Cannae (216 BC); Schlieffen owed more to Napoleon's strategic maneuver on Ulm (1805)".
 David G. Chandler, The Campaigns of Napoleon. p. 407
 Adrian Gilbert (2000). The Encyclopedia of Warfare: From Earliest Time to the Present Day. Taylor & Francis. p. 133. ISBN 978-1-57958-216-6. Archived from the original on 29 July 2014. Retrieved 11 July 2014.
 Adrian Gilbert (2000). The Encyclopedia of Warfare: From Earliest Time to the Present Day. Taylor & Francis. p. 133. ISBN 978-1-57958-216-6. Archived from the original on 29 July 2014. Retrieved 11 July 2014.
 Adrian Gilbert (2000). The Encyclopedia of Warfare: From Earliest Time to the Present Day. Taylor & Francis. p. 133. ISBN 978-1-57958-216-6. Archived from the original on 29 July 2014. Retrieved 11 July 2014.
 Schom 1997, p. 414
 McLynn 1998, p. 350
 Cronin 1994, p. 344
 Karsh 2001, p. 12
 Sicker 2001, p. 99.
 Michael V. Leggiere (2015). Napoleon and Berlin: The Franco-Prussian War in North Germany, 1813. p. 9. ISBN 978-0806180175. Archived from the original on 18 November 2016.
 Chandler 1966, pp. 467–68
 Brooks 2000, p. 110
 Brooks 2000, p. 110
 Brooks 2000, p. 110
 McLynn 1998, p. 497
 Jacques Godechot et al. Napoleonic Era in Europe (1971) pp. 126–39
 McLynn 1998, p. 370
 August Fournier (1911). Napoleon I.: A Biography. p. 459. Archived from the original on 18 November 2016.
 August Fournier (1911). Napoleon I.: A Biography. p. 459. Archived from the original on 18 November 2016.
 Roberts 2014, pp. 458–59.
 Roberts 2014, pp. 459–61.
 Horne, Alistair (1997). How Far From Austerlitz? Napoleon 1805–1815. Pan Macmillan. p. 238. ISBN 978-1743285404. Archived from the original on 25 February 2018.
 Todd Fisher & Gregory Fremont-Barnes, The Napoleonic Wars: The Rise and Fall of an Empire. p. 197.
 Fisher & Fremont-Barnes pp. 198–99.
 Fisher & Fremont-Barnes p. 199.
 "The Erfurt Convention 1808". Napoleon-series.org. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 22 April 2013.
 Fisher & Fremont-Barnes p. 205.
 Chandler 1966, pp. 659–60
 Chandler 1966, pp. 659–60
 John Lynch, Caudillos in Spanish America 1800–1850. Oxford: Clarendon Press 1992, pp. 402–03.
 Fisher & Fremont-Barnes, p. 106.
 Chandler 1966, p. 690
 Chandler 1966, p. 701
 Chandler 1966, p. 705
 Chandler 1966, p. 706
 Chandler 1966, p. 707
 David G. Chandler, The Campaigns of Napoleon. p. 708
 David G. Chandler, The Campaigns of Napoleon. p. 720
 David G. Chandler, The Campaigns of Napoleon. p. 729
 "The British Expeditionary Force to Walcheren: 1809". napoleon-series.org. Archived from the original on 18 July 2011.
 Todd Fisher & Gregory Fremont-Barnes, The Napoleonic Wars: The Rise and Fall of an Empire. p. 144.
 David G. Chandler, The Campaigns of Napoleon. p. 732.
 McLynn 1998, p. 378
 McLynn 1998, p. 495
 McLynn 1998, p. 507
 McLynn 1998, p. 506
 McLynn 1998, pp. 504–05
 Harvey 2006, p. 773
 McLynn 1998, p. 518
 Markham 1988, p. 194
 "Napoleon1812". napoleon-1812.nl. Archived from the original on 13 February 2016.
 Markham 1988, pp. 190, 199
 McLynn 1998, p. 541
 McLynn 1998, p. 549
 McLynn 1998, p. 565
 Chandler 1995, p. 1020
 Riley, J.P. (2013). Napoleon and the World War of 1813: Lessons in Coalition Warfighting. Routledge. p. 206. ISBN 978-1136321351. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015.
 Leggiere (2007). The Fall of Napoleon: Volume 1, The Allied Invasion of France, 1813–1814. pp. 53–54. ISBN 978-0521875424. Archived from the original on 21 September 2015.
 Fremont-Barnes 2004, p. 14
 McLynn 1998, p. 585
 Gates 2003, p. 259.
 Lieven, Dominic (2010). Russia Against Napoleon: The True Story of the Campaigns of War and Peace. Penguin. pp. 484–85. ISBN 978-1101429389. Archived from the original on 20 March 2015.
 "Napoleon's act of abdication". Bulletin des lois de la Republique Française. July 1814. Archived from the original on 22 December 2011. Retrieved 28 August 2009.
 McLynn 1998, pp. 593–94
 McLynn 1998, p. 597
 Latson, Jennifer. "Why Napoleon Probably Should Have Just Stayed in Exile the First Time". Archived from the original on 25 June 2016.
 "PBS – Napoleon: Napoleon and Josephine". Archived from the original on 21 August 2017.
 McLynn 1998, p. 604
 McLynn 1998, p. 605
 McLynn 1998, p. 607
 Chesney 2006, p. 35
 Cordingly 2004, p. 254
 Cox, Dale (2015). Nicolls' outpost : a War of 1812 fort at Chattahoochee, Florida. Old Kitchen Books. p. 87. ISBN 978-0692379363.
 Hibbert, Christopher (2003). Napoleon's Women. W.W. Norton & Company. p. 272. ISBN 978-0393324990. Retrieved 5 April 2018.
 Information, Reed Business (28 October 1982). "Napoleon's moulds". New Scientist: 257.
 Schom 1997, pp. 769–70
 "Two Days at Saint Helena". The Spirit of the English Magazines: Monroe and Francis. 1832: 402. Retrieved 5 April 2018.
 Jones, David (14 October 1982). "The Singular Case of Napoleon's Wallpaper". New Scientist: 101.
 McLynn 1998, p. 642
 I, Napoleon; Marchand, Louis Joseph (29 October 2017). Chronicles of Caesar's Wars: The First-Ever Translation. Translated by Barzani, Arshan (1 ed.). Clio Books. Archived from the original on 3 December 2017.
 Hicks, Peter. "Napoleon's English Lessons". Napoleon.org. Archived from the original on 18 September 2016. Retrieved 24 March 2018.
 Wilkins 1972
 McLynn 1998, p. 651
 Albert Benhamou, Inside Longwood – Barry O'Meara's clandestine letters Archived 11 December 2012 at the Wayback Machine, 2012
 McLynn 1998, p. 655
 Roberts, Napoleon (2014) 799–801
 Wilson 1975, pp. 293–95
 Fulghum 2007
 Driskel 1993, p. 168
 McLynn 1998, p. 656
 Johnson 2002, pp. 180–81
 Cullen 2008, pp. 146–48
 Cullen 2008, p. 156
 Cullen 2008, p. 50
 Cullen 2008, p. 161, and Hindmarsh et al. 2008, p. 2092
 "L'Empire et le Saint-Siège". Napoleon.org. Archived from the original on 19 September 2011. Retrieved 15 June 2011.
 "Napoleon's "divorce"". Archived from the original on 21 January 2018. Retrieved 20 January 2018.
 catholictextbookproject.com
 William Roberts, "Napoleon, the Concordat of 1801, and Its Consequences". in by Frank J. Coppa, ed., Controversial Concordats: The Vatican's Relations with Napoleon, Mussolini, and Hitler (1999) pp. 34–80.
 Nigel Aston, Religion and revolution in France, 1780–1804 (Catholic University of America Press, 2000) pp. 279–315
 Nigel Aston, Christianity and revolutionary Europe, 1750–1830 (Cambridge University Press, 2002) pp. 261–62.
 Luis Granados (2012). Damned Good Company. Humanist Press. pp. 182–83. ISBN 978-0931779244. Archived from the original on 22 September 2015.
 "When Napoleon Captured the Pope". The New York Times. 1981-12-13. Archived from the original on 21 January 2018. Retrieved 30 January 2018.
 "Napoleon and the Pope: From the Concordat to the Excommunication". Archived from the original on 24 January 2018. Retrieved 23 January 2018.
 "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 21 January 2018. Retrieved 20 January 2018.
 "Pius VII | pope". Archived from the original on 2 May 2016. Retrieved 6 May 2017.
 McLynn 1998, p. 436
 Green, David B. (9 February 2014). "This Day in Jewish History / The Sanhedrin of Paris Convenes at the Behest of Napoleon". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 1 December 2017. Retrieved 21 November 2017.
 Schwarzfuchs 1979, p. 50
 Cronin 1994, p. 315
 Pieter Geyl, Napoleon, For and Against (1982)
 George F.E. Rudé (1988). The French Revolution. Grove Weidenfeld. p. 128. ISBN 978-0-8021-3272-7. Archived from the original on 26 September 2015.
 Jack Coggins (1966). Soldiers And Warriors: An Illustrated History. Courier Dover Publications. p. 187. ISBN 978-0-486-45257-9.
 Sally Waller (2002). France in Revolution, 1776–1830. Heinemann. p. 188. ISBN 978-0-435-32732-3.
 See David Chandler, "General Introduction" to his The Campaigns of Napoleon: The Mind and Method of History's Greatest Soldier (1975).
 Roberts, Napoleon: A Life (2014) pp. 470–73
 Gregory R. Copley (2007). The Art of Victory: Strategies for Personal Success and Global Survival in a Changing World. Simon and Schuster. p. 97. ISBN 978-1-4165-2478-6.
 Dwyer 2013, pp. 175–76
 J. M. Thompson, Napoleon Bonaparte: His Rise and Fall (1954), p. 285
 Christopher Hibbert (1999). Wellington: A Personal History. Da Capo Press. p. 171. ISBN 978-0-7382-0148-1.
 McLynn 1998, p. 357
 Steven Englund, Napoleon: A Political Life (2004), pp. 379ff
 van Crevald, Martin (1987). Command in War. Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. p. 64. ISBN 978-0-674-14441-5.
 "Napoleon Bonaparte (Character)". Internet Movie Database. Archived from the original on 6 December 2008. Retrieved 12 October 2008. and Bell 2007, p. 13
 The Fortnightly, Volume 114. Chapman and Hall, 1923. p. 836.
 Louis Antoine Fauvelet de Bourrienne. "Memoirs of Napoleon Bonaparte." Charles Scribner's Sons, 1889. Vol. 1, p. 7.
 Kircheisen, F. M. Napoleon New York : Harcourt, Brace, 1932
 Davydov, Denis. In the Service of the Tsar Against Napoleon: The Memoirs of Denis Davydov, 1806–1814. Translation by Gregory Troubetzkoy. Greenhill Books, 1999. p. 64.
 "Greatest cartooning coup of all time: The Brit who convinced everyone Napoleon was short". National Post. 28 April 2016. Retrieved 30 September 2017.
 Roberts 2004, p. 93
 Owen Connelly (2006). Blundering to Glory: Napoleon's Military Campaigns. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 7. ISBN 978-0742553187.
 "The Myth of Napoleon's Height: How a Single Image Can Change History". Entity. 13 February 2017. Archived from the original on 5 January 2018. Retrieved 4 January 2018.
 Seward, Desmond. Napoleon's Family. New York: Viking, 1986.
 The Bookman, Vol. 29, p. 304. Diary of Capt. Ross, commander of the Northumberland.
 Bordes 2007, p. 118.
 Hall 2006, p. 181
 McGraw-Hill's, US History 2012, pp. 112–13
 Blaufarb 2007, pp. 101–02
 McLynn 1998, p. 255
 Bernard Schwartz (1998). The Code Napoleon and the Common-law World. The Lawbook Exchange. p. 7. ISBN 978-1-886363-59-5. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015.
 Wood 2007, p. 55
 Scheck 2008, Chapter: The Road to National Unification
 Astarita 2005, p. 264
 Alter 2006, pp. 61–76
 Andrew Roberts, Napoleon: A Life (2014) p. xxxiii
 Robert R. Palmer and Joel Colton, A History of the Modern World (New York: McGraw Hill, 1995), pp. 428–29
 Archer et al. 2002, p. 397
 Flynn 2001, p. 16
 Bruce McConachy, "The Roots of Artillery Doctrine: Napoleonic Artillery Tactics Reconsidered", Journal of Military History 2001 65(3): 617–40. in JSTOR; online Archived 19 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine
 Archer et al. 2002, p. 383
 John Shy, "Jomini" in Peter Paret, ed. Makers of Modern Strategy: From Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age (1986).
 Archer et al. 2002, p. 380
 Roberts 2001, p. 272
 Archer et al. 2002, p. 404
 Hallock, William; Wade, Herbert T (1906). "Outlines of the evolution of weights and measures and the metric system". London: The Macmillan Company. pp. 66–69.
 Denis Février. "Un historique du mètre" (in French). Ministère de l'Economie, des Finances et de l'Industrie. Archived from the original on 28 February 2011. Retrieved 10 March 2011.
 Thierry Sabot (1 October 2000). "Les poids et mesures sous l'Ancien Régime" [The weights and measures of the Ancien Régime] (in French). histoire-genealogie. Archived from the original on 5 December 2010. Retrieved 10 February 2011.
 O'Connor 2003
 Clive Emsley (2014). Napoleon: Conquest, Reform and Reorganisation. Routledge. p. 52. ISBN 978-1317610281. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015.
 L. Pearce Williams, "Science, education and Napoleon I". Isis (1956). 369–82 in JSTOR Archived 3 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine
 L. Pearce Williams, "Science, education and Napoleon I". Isis (1956). 369–82 in JSTOR Archived 3 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine
 Margaret Bradley, "Scientific education versus military training: the influence of Napoleon Bonaparte on the École Polytechnique". Annals of science (1975) 32#5 pp. 415–49.
 Roberts 2014, pp. 278–81
 Hastings, Max (31 October 2014). "Everything is Owed to Glory". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 13 November 2014.
 Charles Esdaile, Napoleon's Wars: An International History 1803–1815 (2008), p. 39
 Colin S. Gray (2007). War, Peace and International Relations: An Introduction to Strategic History. Routledge. p. 47. ISBN 978-1-134-16951-1. Archived from the original on 20 March 2015.
 Abbott 2005, p. 3
 McLynn 1998, p. 666
 Repa, Jan (2 December 2005). "Furore over Austerlitz ceremony". BBC. Archived from the original on 20 April 2010. Retrieved 5 April 2010.
 Poulos 2000
 Geyl 1947
 Philip Dwyer, "Remembering and Forgetting in Contemporary France: Napoleon, Slavery, and the French History Wars", French Politics, Culture & Society (2008) 26#3. pp. 110–22. online
 Chandler 1973, p. xliii
 Hanson 2003
 Cronin 1994, pp. 342–43
 Correlli Barnett, Bonaparte (1978)
 Jean Tulard, Napoleon: The Myth of the Saviour (1984)
 See Bergeron, Louis (1981). France Under Napoleon. Princeton U.P. ISBN 978-0691007892.
 See Dominic Lieven, "Review article: Russia and the defeat of Napoleon." Kritika: Explorations in Russian and Eurasian History (2006) 7#2 pp. 283–308.
 Robert S. Alexander, Napoleon (Oxford University Press, 2001), examines major debates among historians.
 E.A. Arnold, "English Language Napoleonic Historiography, 1973–1998: Thoughts and Considerations". Proceedings-Western Society for French History, Vol. 26 (2000). pp. 283–94.
 John Dunne, "Recent Napoleonic Historiography: 'Poor Relation' Makes Good?" French History (2004) 18#4 pp. 484–91.
 Alan Forrest, "Propaganda and the Legitimation of Power in Napoleonic France". French History, 2004 18(4): 426–45
 Hubert N.B. Richardson, A Dictionary of Napoleon and His Times (1921) online free pp. 101–06.
 Mark, Bryant, "Broadsides against Boney." History Today 60.1 (2010): 52+
 Mark Bryant, Napoleonic Wars in Cartoons (Grub Street, 2009).
 Sudhir Hazareesingh, "Memory and Political Imagination: the Legend of Napoleon Revisited". French History, 2004 18(4): 463–83
 Venita Datta, "'L'appel Au Soldat': Visions of the Napoleonic Legend in Popular Culture of the Belle Epoque". French Historical Studies 2005 28(1): 1–30
 "Call for Papers: International Napoleonic Society, Fourth International Napoleonic Congress". La Fondation Napoléon. Archived from the original on 8 January 2009. Retrieved 27 June 2008.
 Laurent, Ottavi (8 February 2012). "A New Napoleonic Campaign for Montereau". Foundation Napoleon. Archived from the original on 29 September 2013.
 Alexander Grab, Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe (Macmillan, 2003), country by country analysis
 "Napoleonic Code". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 29 December 2011. Retrieved 13 April 2012.
 Andrzej Nieuwazny, "Napoleon and Polish identity". History Today, May 1998 vol. 48 no. 5 pp. 50–55
 McGRAW-HILL's, US History 2012, pp. 112–13
 "Biography of Joesephine de Beauharnais".
 McLynn 1998, p. 117
 McLynn 1998, p. 271
 McLynn 1998, p. 118
 McLynn 1998, p. 188
 McLynn 1998, p. 284
 McLynn 1998, p. 100
 McLynn 1998, p. 663
 McLynn 1998, p. 630
 Lucotte, Gérard; Macé, Jacques & Hrechdakian, Peter (September 2013). "Reconstruction of the Lineage Y Chromosome Haplotype of Napoléon the First" (PDF). International Journal of Sciences. 2 (9): 127–39. ISSN 2305-3925. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 April 2014.
 McLynn 1998, p. 423
 Bouchon, Lionel A. (4 February 2017). "Genealogy of Napoleon – The Bonaparte Family". Napoleon & Empire. Archived from the original on 20 April 2017. Retrieved 24 February 2018.
References
Biographical studies
Abbott, John (2005). Life of Napoleon Bonaparte. Kessinger Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4179-7063-6.
Bell, David A. (2015). Napoleon: A Concise Biography. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-026271-6. only 140pp; by a scholar
Blaufarb, Rafe (2007). Napoleon: Symbol for an Age, A Brief History with Documents. Bedford. ISBN 978-0-312-43110-5.
Chandler, David (2002). Napoleon. Leo Cooper. ISBN 978-0-85052-750-6.
Cronin, Vincent (1994). Napoleon. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-00-637521-0.
Dwyer, Philip (2008). Napoleon: The Path to Power. Yale University Press. ASIN B00280LN5G.
Dwyer, Philip (2013). Citizen Emperor: Napoleon in Power. Yale University Press. ASIN B00GGSG3W4.
Englund, Steven (2010). Napoleon: A Political Life. Scribner. ISBN 978-0-674-01803-7.
Gueniffey, Patrice. Bonaparte: 1769–1802 (Harvard UP, 2015, French edition 2013); 1008 pp.; vol 1 of most comprehensive recent scholarly biography by leading French specialist; less emphasis on battles and campaigns excerpt; also online review
Johnson, Paul (2002). Napoleon: A life. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-670-03078-1.; 200 pp.; quite hostile
Lefebvre, Georges (1969). Napoleon from 18 Brumaire to Tilsit, 1799–1807. Columbia University Press. influential wide-ranging history
Lefebvre, Georges (1969). Napoleon: from Tilsit to Waterloo, 1807–1815. Columbia University Press.
Lyons, Martyn (1994). Napoleon Bonaparte and the Legacy of the French Revolution. St. Martin's Press.
Markham, Felix (1963). Napoleon. Mentor.; 303 pp.; short biography by an Oxford scholar online
McLynn, Frank (1998). Napoleon. Pimlico. ISBN 978-0-7126-6247-5. ASIN 0712662472.
Roberts, Andrew (2014). Napoleon: A Life. Penguin Group. ISBN 978-0-670-02532-9.
Thompson, J.M. (1951). Napoleon Bonaparte: His Rise and Fall. Oxford U.P., 412 pp.; by an Oxford scholar
Primary sources
Gourgaud, Gaspard (1903) [1899]. Talks of Napoleon at St. Helena. Translated from the French by Elizabeth Wormeley Latimer. Chicago: A.C. McClurg.
Specialty studies
Alder, Ken (2002). The Measure of All Things – The Seven-Year Odyssey and Hidden Error That Transformed the World. Free Press. ISBN 978-0-7432-1675-3.
Alter, Peter (2006). T. C. W. Blanning and Hagen Schulze, ed. Unity and Diversity in European Culture c. 1800. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-726382-2.
Amini, Iradj (2000). Napoleon and Persia. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-0-934211-58-1.
Archer, Christon I.; Ferris, John R.; Herwig, Holger H. (2002). World History of Warfare. University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 978-0-8032-4423-8.
Astarita, Tommaso (2005). Between Salt Water And Holy Water: A History Of Southern Italy. W.W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-05864-2.
Bell, David (2007). The First Total War. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN 978-0-618-34965-4.
Bordes, Philippe (2007). Jacques-Louis David. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-12346-3.
Brooks, Richard (2000). Atlas of World Military History. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-7607-2025-7.
Chandler, David (1966). The Campaigns of Napoleon. New York: Scribner. ISBN 978-0025236608. OCLC 740560411.
Chandler, David (1973) [1966]. The Campaigns of Napoleon.
Chesney, Charles (2006). Waterloo Lectures:A Study Of The Campaign Of 1815. Kessinger Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4286-4988-0.
Connelly, Owen (2006). Blundering to Glory: Napoleon's Military Campaigns. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-7425-5318-7.
Cordingly, David (2004). The Billy Ruffian: The Bellerophon and the Downfall of Napoleon. Bloomsbury. ISBN 978-1-58234-468-3.
Cullen, William (2008). Is Arsenic an Aphrodisiac?. Royal Society of Chemistry. ISBN 978-0-85404-363-7.
Driskel, Paul (1993). As Befits a Legend. Kent State University Press. ISBN 978-0-87338-484-1.
Flynn, George Q. (2001). Conscription and democracy: The Draft in France, Great Britain, and the United States. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-313-31912-9.
Fremont-Barnes, Gregory; Fisher, Todd (2004). The Napoleonic Wars: The Rise and Fall of an Empire. Osprey. ISBN 978-1-84176-831-1.
Fulghum, Neil (2007). "Death Mask of Napoleon". University of North Carolina. Retrieved 4 August 2008.
Gates, David (2001). The Spanish Ulcer: A History of the Peninsular War. Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-81083-1.
Gates, David (2003). The Napoleonic Wars, 1803–1815. Pimlico. ISBN 978-0-7126-0719-3.
Godechot, Jacques; et al. (1971). The Napoleonic era in Europe. Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Grab, Alexander (2003). Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe. Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-333-68275-3.
Hall, Stephen (2006). Size Matters. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN 978-0-618-47040-2.
Harvey, Robert (2006). The War of Wars. Robinson. ISBN 978-1-84529-635-3.
Hindmarsh, J. Thomas; Savory, John (2008). "The Death of Napoleon, Cancer or Arsenic?". Clinical Chemistry. 54 (12): 2092. doi:10.1373/clinchem.2008.117358. Retrieved 10 October 2010.
Karsh, Inari (2001). Empires of the Sand: The Struggle for Mastery in the Middle East, 1789–1923. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-00541-9.
Mowat, R.B. (1924) The Diplomacy of Napoleon (1924) 350 pp. online
O'Connor, J; Robertson, E F (2003). "The history of measurement". St Andrew's University. Retrieved 18 July 2008.
Poulos, Anthi (2000). "1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict". International Journal of Legal Information (vol 28 ed.). 28: 1–44. doi:10.1017/S0731126500008842.
Richardson, Hubert N.B. A Dictionary of Napoleon and His Times (1921) online free 489pp
Roberts, Chris (2004). Heavy Words Lightly Thrown. Granta. ISBN 978-1-86207-765-2.
Schom, Alan (1997). Napoleon Bonaparte. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-017214-5.
Schroeder, Paul W. (1996). The Transformation of European Politics 1763–1848. Oxford U.P. pp. 177–560. ISBN 978-0-19-820654-5. advanced diplomatic history of Napoleon and his era
Schwarzfuchs, Simon (1979). Napoleon, the Jews and the Sanhedrin. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-19-710023-3.
Watson, William (2003). Tricolor and crescent. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-275-97470-1. Retrieved 12 June 2009.
Sicker, Martin (2001). The Islamic World in Decline: From the Treaty of Karlowitz to the Disintegration of the Ottoman Empire. Greenwood. p. 99. ISBN 978-0275968915.
Wells, David (1992). The Penguin Dictionary of Curious and Interesting Geometry. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-011813-1.
Historiography and memory
Broadley, Alexander Meyrick (1911). Napoleon in Caricature 1795-1821.
Dwyer, Philip G. (2004). "Napoleon Bonaparte as Hero and Saviour: Image, Rhetoric and Behaviour in the Construction of a Legend". French History. 18 (4): 379–403. doi:10.1093/fh/18.4.379.
Dwyer, Philip (2008). "Remembering and Forgetting in Contemporary France: Napoleon, Slavery, and the French History Wars". French Politics, Culture & Society. 26 (3): 110–22. doi:10.3167/fpcs.2008.260306.
Englund, Steven. "Napoleon and Hitler". Journal of the Historical Society (2006) 6#1 pp. 151–69.
Geyl, Pieter (1982) [1947]. Napoleon For and Against. Penguin Books.
Hanson, Victor Davis (2003). "The Claremont Institute: The Little Tyrant, A review of Napoleon: A Penguin Life". The Claremont Institute.
Hazareesingh, Sudhir (2005). The Legend of Napoleon. excerpt and text search
Hazareesingh, Sudhir. "Memory and Political Imagination: The Legend of Napoleon Revisited", French History (2004) 18#4 pp. 463–83.
Hazareesingh, Sudhir (2005). "Napoleonic Memory in Nineteenth-Century France: The Making of a Liberal Legend". MLN. 120 (4): 747–73. doi:10.1353/mln.2005.0119.
External links
Napoleon Bonaparte
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Wikimedia Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Resources from Wikiversity
The Napoleonic Guide
Napoleon Series
International Napoleonic Society
Biography by the US Public Broadcasting Service
Newspaper clippings about Napoleon in the 20th Century Press Archives of the German National Library of Economics (ZBW)
Napoleon I of France
House of Bonaparte
Born: 15 August 1769 Died: 5 May 1821
Political offices
New title
Directory dissolved
Provisional Consul of the French Republic
11 November – 12 December 1799 
Served alongside: 
Roger Ducos and Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès	Became First Consul
New title
Consulate established
First Consul of the French Republic
12 December 1799 – 18 May 1804 
Served alongside: 
Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérès (Second Consul)
Charles-François Lebrun (Third Consul)	Became Emperor
New title
Italian Republic established
President of the Italian Republic
26 January 1802 – 17 March 1805	Vacant
(Became King)
Title next held by
Enrico De Nicola
New title
Helvetic Republic dissolved
Mediator of the Swiss Confederation
19 February 1803 – 19 October 1813	New Confederation established
Regnal titles
Vacant
French Revolution
Title last held by
Louis XVI
as King of the French	Emperor of the French
18 May 1804 – 11 April 1814	Succeeded by
Louis XVIII
as King of France and Navarre
Vacant
Title last held by
Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor
as last crowned monarch, 1530	King of Italy
17 March 1805 – 11 April 1814	Vacant
Title next held by
Victor Emmanuel II of Savoy
Vacant
Title last held by
Louis XVI	Co-Prince of Andorra
1806 – 11 April 1814	Succeeded by
Louis XVIII
New title
State created
Protector of the Confederation of the Rhine
12 July 1806 – 19 October 1813	Confederation dissolved
successive ruler:
Francis I of Austria
as Head of the Präsidialmacht Austria
New title	Sovereign of the Island of Elba
11 April 1814 – 20 March 1815	Relinquished title
Preceded by
Louis XVIII
as King of France and Navarre	Emperor of the French
Co-Prince of Andorra
20 March – 22 June 1815	Succeeded by
Louis XVIII
as King of France and Navarre
(Napoleon II according to his will only)
Titles in pretence
New title	— TITULAR —
Emperor of the French
11 April 1814 – 20 March 1815	Vacant
Title next held by
Napoleon II
vte
Napoleonic Wars
Third Coalition Fourth Coalition Peninsular War Fifth Coalition French Invasion of Russia Sixth Coalition Seventh Coalition
Belli-
gerents	
France,
client states
and allies	
France Polish Legions Italy Holland Etruria Swiss Confederation Naples Confederation of the Rhine Bavaria Saxony Westphalia Württemberg Denmark–Norway Ottoman Empire Persia Spain
Coalition
forces	
United Kingdom Austria Russia Prussia Spain Portugal Sicily Papal States Ottoman Empire Persia Sardinia Sweden Netherlands Brunswick Hanover Nassau French Royalists
Major
battles	
Prelude	
French Revolution First Coalition Second Coalition 18 Brumaire Planned invasion of the United Kingdom Duc d'Enghien Execution Coronation of Napoleon
1805	
Diamond Rock Cape Finisterre Wertingen Günzburg Haslach-Jungingen Elchingen Ulm Verona Trafalgar Caldiero Cape Ortegal Amstetten Dürenstein Schöngrabern Austerlitz
1806	
Gaeta Campo Tenese Maida Schleiz Saalfeld Jena–Auerstedt Erfurt Halle Magdeburg Prenzlau Pasewalk Stettin Waren-Nossentin Lübeck Greater Poland uprising Hamelin Czarnowo Golymin Pułtusk
1807	
Mohrungen Stralsund Eylau Ostrołęka Kolberg Danzig Mileto Guttstadt-Deppen Heilsberg Friedland Copenhagen Invasion of Portugal
1808	
Dos de Mayo Bruch Rosily Squadron Cabezón 1st Zaragoza Valencia Medina de Rioseco Bailén Roliça Vimeiro Pancorbo Valmaseda Burgos Espinosa Tudela Somosierra 2nd Zaragoza Sahagún Benavente
1809	
Castellón Uclés Corunna Valls Tyrolean Rebellion Villafranca Yevenes/Yébenes Ciudad Real 1st Porto Medellín Bergisel Sacile Teugen-Hausen Raszyn Abensberg Landshut Eckmühl Ratisbon Neumarkt-Sankt Veit Dalmatian Campaign Ebelsberg Gerona Piave River Grijó 2nd Porto Wörgl Tarvis Aspern-Essling Alcañiz Sankt Michael Stralsund Raab María Graz Wagram Korneuburg Stockerau Gefrees Hollabrunn Schöngrabern Armistice of Znaim Talavera Walcheren Campaign Ölper Almonacid Tamames Ocaña Alba de Tormes
1810	
Cádiz Astorga Ciudad Rodrigo Barquilla Côa Almeida Bussaco
1811	
Gebora Barrosa Pombal Redinha Casal Novo Campo Maior Sabugal Almeida Fuentes de Oñoro Tarragona Albuera Usagre Saguntum Arroyo dos Molinos Valencia
1812	
Ciudad Rodrigo Badajoz Villagarcia Almaraz Maguilla Mir Ekau Salamanca García Hernández Saltanovka Ostrovno Vitebsk Kobryn Klyastitsy Majadahonda Gorodechno Smolensk 1st Polotsk Valutino Mesoten Borodino Burgos Tarutino 2nd Polotsk Venta del Pozo Maloyaroslavets Chashniki Vyazma Smoliani Krasnoi Berezina
1813	
Castalla Lützen Bautzen Tarragona Luckau Vitoria San Sebastián Pyrenees Sorauren Großbeeren Katzbach Dresden 1st Kulm San Marcial Dennewitz 2nd Kulm Göhrde Bidassoa Leipzig Hanau Nivelle Bornhöved Sehested
1814	
Brienne La Rothière Mincio River Champaubert Montmirail Château-Thierry Vauchamps Garris Mormant Montereau Orthez Bar-sur-Aube Laon Reims Craonne Arcis-sur-Aube Fère-Champenoise Saint-Dizier Montmartre Paris Toulouse Bayonne
1815	
Panaro Occhiobello Carpi Casaglia Ronco Cesenatico Pesaro Scapezzano Tolentino Ancona Castel di Sangro San Germano Gaeta Quatre Bras Ligny Waterloo Wavre Rocheserviere La Suffel Rocquencourt Issy
Info	
French and ally
military and
political leaders	
Napoleon Louis-Alexandre Berthier Joachim Murat Louis-Nicolas Davout Jean Lannes Auguste de Marmont André Masséna Michel Ney Jean-de-Dieu Soult Marshal Victor Jean-Baptiste Bessières Pierre-Charles Villeneuve Joseph I Louis Bonaparte Jérôme Bonaparte Prince Poniatowski Prince Eugène Maximilian I Joseph of Bavaria Frederick Augustus I of Saxony Frederick I of Württemberg Frederick VI of Denmark
Coalition
military and
political leaders	
Duke of Wellington Rowland Hill John Moore Horatio Nelson Thomas Cochrane Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor Manuel Lapeña Archduke Charles Prince von Schwarzenberg Archduke John of Austria Alexander I of Russia Mikhail Kutuzov Michael Andreas Barclay de Tolly Count Bennigsen Pyotr Bagration Frederick William III of Prussia Gebhard von Blücher Duke of Brunswick Prince of Hohenlohe Ferdinand VII of Spain Miguel de Álava Maria I of Portugal Prince Regent John of Portugal Count of Feira William, Prince of Orange Ferdinand I of the Two Sicilies Gustav IV Adolf of Sweden Prince Charles John of Sweden Louis XVIII of France
Related
conflicts	
Anglo-Russian War Anglo-Spanish War Anglo-Swedish War Anglo-Turkish War English Wars Gunboat War Dano-Swedish War Finnish War Pomeranian War (Franco-Swedish War) Russo-Persian War Russo-Turkish War Spanish American wars of independence Swedish–Norwegian War War of 1812
Treaties	
Campo Formio Lunéville Amiens Artlenburg Pressburg Finckenstein Tilsit Cintra Schönbrunn Paris (1810) Paris (1812) Tauroggen Ried Chaumont Kiel Mantua Casalanza Paris (1815)
Miscellaneous	
Bibliography Bourbon Restoration Casualties Congress of Erfurt Continental System Conference of Dresden England expects that every man will do his duty Grande Armée Longwood House
Portal Portal
vte
French Revolution
Causes Timeline Ancien Régime Revolution Constitutional monarchy Republic Directory Consulate Glossary Journals Museum
Significant civil and political events by year
1788	
Day of the Tiles (7 Jun 1788) Assembly of Vizille (21 Jul 1788)
1789	
What Is the Third Estate? (Jan 1789) Réveillon riots (28 Apr 1789) Convocation of the Estates-General (5 May 1789) Death of the Dauphin (4 June 1789) National Assembly (17 Jun – 9 Jul 1790) Tennis Court Oath (20 Jun 1789) National Constituent Assembly (9 Jul – 30 Sep 1791) Storming of the Bastille (14 Jul 1789) Great Fear (20 Jul – 5 Aug 1789) Abolition of Feudalism (4-11 Aug 1789) Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (27 Aug 1789) Women's March on Versailles (5 Oct 1789)
1790	
Abolition of the Parlements (Feb–Jul 1790) Abolition of the Nobility (19 Jun 1790) Civil Constitution of the Clergy (12 Jul 1790) Fête de la Fédération (14 Jul 1790)
1791	
Flight to Varennes (20–21 Jun 1791) Champ de Mars Massacre (17 Jul 1791) Declaration of Pillnitz (27 Aug 1791) The Constitution of 1791 (3 Sep 1791) Legislative Assembly (1 Oct 1791 – Sep 1792)
1792	
France declares war (20 Apr 1792) Brunswick Manifesto (25 Jul 1792) Paris Commune becomes insurrectionary (Jun 1792) 10th of August (10 Aug 1792) September Massacres (Sep 1792) National Convention (20 Sep 1792 – 26 Oct 1795) First republic declared (22 Sep 1792)
1793	
Execution of Louis XVI (21 Jan 1793) Revolutionary Tribunal (9 Mar 1793 – 31 May 1795) Reign of Terror (27 Jun 1793 – 27 Jul 1794) Committee of Public Safety Committee of General Security Fall of the Girondists (2 Jun 1793) Assassination of Marat (13 Jul 1793) Levée en masse (23 Aug 1793) The Death of Marat (painting) Law of Suspects (17 Sep 1793) Marie Antoinette is guillotined (16 Oct 1793) Anti-clerical laws (throughout the year)
1794	
Danton and Desmoulins guillotined (5 Apr 1794) Law of 22 Prairial (10 Jun 1794) Thermidorian Reaction (27 Jul 1794) Robespierre guillotined (28 Jul 1794) White Terror (Fall 1794) Closing of the Jacobin Club (11 Nov 1794)
1795	
Constitution of the Year III (22 Aug 1795) Conspiracy of the Equals (Nov 1795) Directoire (1795–99) Council of Five Hundred Council of Ancients 13 Vendémiaire 5 Oct 1795
1797	
Coup of 18 Fructidor (4 Sep 1797) Second Congress of Rastatt (Dec 1797)
1799	
Coup of 30 Prairial VII (18 Jun 1799) Coup of 18 Brumaire (9 Nov 1799) Constitution of the Year VIII (24 Dec 1799) Consulate
Revolutionary campaigns
1792	
Verdun Thionville Valmy Royalist Revolts Chouannerie Vendée Dauphiné Lille Siege of Mainz Jemappes Namur [fr]
1793	
First Coalition Siege of Toulon (18 Sep – 18 Dec 1793) War in the Vendée Battle of Neerwinden) Battle of Famars (23 May 1793) Expédition de Sardaigne (21 Dec 1792 - 25 May 1793) Battle of Kaiserslautern Siege of Mainz Battle of Wattignies Battle of Hondschoote Siege of Bellegarde Battle of Peyrestortes (Pyrenees) First Battle of Wissembourg (13 Oct 1793) Battle of Truillas (Pyrenees) Second Battle of Wissembourg (26–27 Dec 1793)
1794	
Battle of Villers-en-Cauchies (24 Apr 1794) Battle of Boulou (Pyrenees) (30 Apr – 1 May 1794) Battle of Tournay (22 May 1794) Battle of Fleurus (26 Jun 1794) Chouannerie Battle of Tourcoing (18 May 1794) Battle of Aldenhoven (2 Oct 1794)
1795	
Peace of Basel
1796	
Battle of Lonato (3–4 Aug 1796) Battle of Castiglione (5 Aug 1796) Battle of Theiningen Battle of Neresheim (11 Aug 1796) Battle of Amberg (24 Aug 1796) Battle of Würzburg (3 Sep 1796) Battle of Rovereto (4 Sep 1796) First Battle of Bassano (8 Sep 1796) Battle of Emmendingen (19 Oct 1796) Battle of Schliengen (26 Oct 1796) Second Battle of Bassano (6 Nov 1796) Battle of Calliano (6–7 Nov 1796) Battle of the Bridge of Arcole (15–17 Nov 1796) The Ireland Expedition (Dec 1796)
1797	
Naval Engagement off Brittany (13 Jan 1797) Battle of Rivoli (14–15 Jan 1797) Battle of the Bay of Cádiz (25 Jan 1797) Treaty of Leoben (17 Apr 1797) Battle of Neuwied (18 Apr 1797) Treaty of Campo Formio (17 Oct 1797)
1798	
French invasion of Switzerland (28 January – 17 May 1798) French Invasion of Egypt (1798–1801) Irish Rebellion of 1798 (23 May – 23 Sep 1798) Quasi-War (1798–1800) Peasants' War (12 Oct – 5 Dec 1798)
1799	
Second Coalition (1798–1802) Siege of Acre (20 Mar – 21 May 1799) Battle of Ostrach (20–21 Mar 1799) Battle of Stockach (25 Mar 1799) Battle of Magnano (5 Apr 1799) Battle of Cassano (27 Apr 1799) First Battle of Zurich (4–7 Jun 1799) Battle of Trebbia (19 Jun 1799) Battle of Novi (15 Aug 1799) Second Battle of Zurich (25–26 Sep 1799)
1800	
Battle of Marengo (14 Jun 1800) Convention of Alessandria (15 Jun 1800) Battle of Hohenlinden (3 Dec 1800) League of Armed Neutrality (1800–02)
1801	
Treaty of Lunéville (9 Feb 1801) Treaty of Florence (18 Mar 1801) Algeciras Campaign (8 Jul 1801)
1802	
Treaty of Amiens (25 Mar 1802)
Military leaders
France French Army	
Eustache Charles d'Aoust Pierre Augereau Alexandre de Beauharnais Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte Louis-Alexandre Berthier Jean-Baptiste Bessières Guillaume-Marie-Anne Brune Jean François Carteaux Jean Étienne Championnet Chapuis de Tourville Adam Philippe, Comte de Custine Louis-Nicolas Davout Louis Desaix Jacques François Dugommier Thomas-Alexandre Dumas Charles François Dumouriez Pierre Marie Barthélemy Ferino Louis-Charles de Flers Paul Grenier Emmanuel de Grouchy Jacques Maurice Hatry Lazare Hoche Jean-Baptiste Jourdan François Christophe de Kellermann Jean-Baptiste Kléber Pierre Choderlos de Laclos Jean Lannes Charles Leclerc Claude Lecourbe François Joseph Lefebvre Jacques MacDonald Jean-Antoine Marbot Jean Baptiste de Marbot François Séverin Marceau-Desgraviers Auguste de Marmont André Masséna Bon-Adrien Jeannot de Moncey Jean Victor Marie Moreau Édouard Mortier, duc de Trévise Joachim Murat Michel Ney Pierre-Jacques Osten [fr] Nicolas Oudinot Catherine-Dominique de Pérignon Jean-Charles Pichegru Józef Poniatowski Laurent de Gouvion Saint-Cyr Barthélemy Louis Joseph Schérer Jean-Mathieu-Philibert Sérurier Joseph Souham Jean-de-Dieu Soult Louis-Gabriel Suchet Belgrand de Vaubois Claude Victor-Perrin, Duc de Belluno
France French Navy	
Charles-Alexandre Linois
Opposition	
Austrian Empire Austria	
József Alvinczi Archduke Charles, Duke of Teschen Count of Clerfayt (Walloon) Karl Aloys zu Fürstenberg Friedrich Freiherr von Hotze (Swiss) Friedrich Adolf, Count von Kalckreuth Pál Kray (Hungarian) Charles Eugene, Prince of Lambesc (French) Maximilian Baillet de Latour (Walloon) Karl Mack von Leiberich Rudolf Ritter von Otto (Saxon) Prince Josias of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld Peter Vitus von Quosdanovich Prince Heinrich XV of Reuss-Plauen Johann Mészáros von Szoboszló (Hungarian) Karl Philipp Sebottendorf Dagobert von Wurmser
Kingdom of Great Britain Britain	
Sir Ralph Abercromby Admiral Sir James Saumarez Admiral Sir Edward Pellew Prince Frederick, Duke of York and Albany
Dutch Republic Dutch Republic	
William V, Prince of Orange
 Prussia	
Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel Frederick Louis, Prince of Hohenlohe-Ingelfingen
Russian Empire Russia	
Alexander Korsakov Alexander Suvorov
Spain Spain	
Luis Firmin de Carvajal Antonio Ricardos
Other significant figures and factions
Society of 1789	
Jean Sylvain Bailly Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette François Alexandre Frédéric, duc de la Rochefoucauld-Liancourt Isaac René Guy le Chapelier Honoré Gabriel Riqueti, comte de Mirabeau Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès Charles-Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord Nicolas de Condorcet
Feuillants
and monarchiens
Madame de Lamballe Madame du Barry Louis de Breteuil Loménie de Brienne Charles Alexandre de Calonne de Chateaubriand Jean Chouan Grace Elliott Arnaud de La Porte Jean-Sifrein Maury Jacques Necker François-Marie, marquis de Barthélemy Guillaume-Mathieu Dumas Antoine Barnave Lafayette Alexandre-Théodore-Victor, comte de Lameth Charles Malo François Lameth André Chénier Jean-François Rewbell Camille Jordan Madame de Staël Boissy d'Anglas Jean-Charles Pichegru Pierre Paul Royer-Collard
Girondists	
Jacques Pierre Brissot Roland de La Platière Madame Roland Father Henri Grégoire Étienne Clavière Marquis de Condorcet Charlotte Corday Marie Jean Hérault Jean Baptiste Treilhard Pierre Victurnien Vergniaud Bertrand Barère de Vieuzac Jérôme Pétion de Villeneuve Jean Debry Jean-Jacques Duval d'Eprémesnil Olympe de Gouges Jean-Baptiste Robert Lindet Louis Marie de La Révellière-Lépeaux
The Plain	
Abbé Sieyès de Cambacérès Charles François Lebrun Lazare Nicolas Marguerite Carnot Philippe Égalité Louis Philippe I Mirabeau Antoine Christophe Merlin de Thionville Jean Joseph Mounier Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours François de Neufchâteau
Montagnards	
Maximilien Robespierre Georges Danton Jean-Paul Marat Camille Desmoulins Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Paul Nicolas, vicomte de Barras Louis Philippe I Louis Michel le Peletier de Saint-Fargeau Jacques-Louis David Marquis de Sade Georges Couthon Roger Ducos Jean-Marie Collot d'Herbois Jean-Henri Voulland Philippe-Antoine Merlin de Douai Antoine Quentin Fouquier-Tinville Philippe-François-Joseph Le Bas Marc-Guillaume Alexis Vadier Jean-Pierre-André Amar Prieur de la Côte-d'Or Prieur de la Marne Gilbert Romme Jean Bon Saint-André Jean-Lambert Tallien Pierre Louis Prieur Bertrand Barère de Vieuzac Antoine Christophe Saliceti
Hébertists
and Enragés	
Jacques Hébert Jacques Nicolas Billaud-Varenne Pierre Gaspard Chaumette Charles-Philippe Ronsin Antoine-François Momoro François-Nicolas Vincent François Chabot Jean Baptiste Noël Bouchotte Jean-Baptiste-Joseph Gobel François Hanriot Jacques Roux Stanislas-Marie Maillard Charles-Philippe Ronsin Jean-François Varlet Theophile Leclerc Claire Lacombe Pauline Léon Gracchus Babeuf Sylvain Maréchal
Others	
Charles X Louis XVI Louis XVII Louis XVIII Louis Antoine, Duke of Enghien Louis Henri, Prince of Condé Louis Joseph, Prince of Condé Marie Antoinette Napoléon Bonaparte Lucien Bonaparte Joseph Bonaparte Joseph Fesch Joséphine de Beauharnais Joachim Murat Jean Sylvain Bailly Jacques-Donatien Le Ray Guillaume-Chrétien de Malesherbes Talleyrand Thérésa Tallien Gui-Jean-Baptiste Target Catherine Théot List of people associated with the French Revolution
Influential thinkers
Les Lumières Beaumarchais Edmund Burke Anacharsis Cloots Charles-Augustin de Coulomb Pierre Claude François Daunou Diderot Benjamin Franklin Thomas Jefferson Antoine Lavoisier Montesquieu Thomas Paine Jean-Jacques Rousseau Abbé Sieyès Voltaire Mary Wollstonecraft
Cultural impact
La Marseillaise French Tricolour Liberté, égalité, fraternité Marianne Bastille Day Panthéon French Republican Calendar Cult of the Supreme Being Cult of Reason Temple of Reason Sans-culottes Metric system Phrygian cap Women in the French Revolution Symbolism in the French Revolution Historiography of the French Revolution Influence of the French Revolution
vte
Imperial House of France of the First French Empire
Emperor and immediate family	
Napoleon, Emperor of the French Joséphine, Empress of the French Marie Louise, Empress of the French Napoleon, King of Rome
Imperial Coat of Arms of France (1804-1815).svg
French Princes	
Joseph Bonaparte Louis Bonaparte Joachim Murat Eugène de Beauharnais Elisa Bonaparte Jérôme Bonaparte Joseph Fesch Lucien Bonaparte
Several family members held additional titles in vassal states
vte
Bonaparte family
vte
Heads of state of France
Recognized as Francia from 481 to 843 – Recognized as West Francia from 843 to 987 – Recognized as France from 987 to present
Styled President of the Republic after 1871, except from 1940 to 1944 (Chief of State) and 1944 to 1947 (Chairman of the Provisional Government).
Detailed monarch family tree | Simplified monarch family tree
Merovingians (486–751)	
Clovis I Childebert I Chlothar I Charibert I Guntram Chilperic I Sigebert I Childebert II Chlothar II Dagobert I Sigebert II Clovis II Chlothar III Childeric II Theuderic III Clovis IV Childebert III Dagobert III Chilperic II Chlothar IV Theuderic IV Childeric III
Carolingians,
Robertians and Bosonids (751–987)	
Pepin the Short Carloman I Charlemagne (Charles I) Louis I Charles II Louis II Louis III Carloman II Charles the Fat OdoR Charles III Robert IR RudolphB Louis IV Lothair Louis V
House of Capet (987–1328)	
Hugh Capet Robert II Henry I Philip I Louis VI Louis VII Philip II Louis VIII Louis IX Philip III Philip IV Louis X John I Philip V Charles IV
House of Valois (1328–1589)	
Philip VI John II Charles V Charles VI Charles VII Louis XI Charles VIII Louis XII Francis I Henry II Francis II Charles IX Henry III
House of Lancaster (1422–1453)	
Henry VI of England
House of Bourbon (1589–1792)	
Henry IV Louis XIII Louis XIV Louis XV Louis XVI Louis XVII
First Republic (1792–1804)	
National Convention Directory Consulate
First Empire (1804–1815)	
Napoleon I Napoleon II
Bourbon Restoration (1815–1830)	
Louis XVIII Charles X Louis XIX Henry V
July Monarchy (1830–1848)	
Louis Philippe I
Second Republic (1848–1852)	
Jacques-Charles Dupont de l'Eure Executive Commission Louis-Eugène Cavaignac Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte
Second Empire (1852–1870)	
Napoleon III
Government of National Defense (1870–1871)	
Louis-Jules Trochu
Third Republic (1871–1940)	
Adolphe Thiers Patrice de Mac-Mahon Jules Armand Dufaure* Jules Grévy Maurice Rouvier* Sadi Carnot Charles Dupuy* Jean Casimir-Perier Charles Dupuy* Félix Faure Charles Dupuy* Émile Loubet Armand Fallières Raymond Poincaré Paul Deschanel Alexandre Millerand Frédéric François-Marsal* Gaston Doumergue Paul Doumer André Tardieu* Albert Lebrun
Vichy France (1940–1944)	
Philippe Pétain
Provisional Government (1944–1947)	
Charles de Gaulle Félix Gouin Georges Bidault Vincent Auriol Léon Blum
Fourth Republic (1947–1958)	
Vincent Auriol René Coty
Fifth Republic (1958–present)	
Charles de Gaulle Alain Poher* Georges Pompidou Alain Poher* Valéry Giscard d'Estaing François Mitterrand Jacques Chirac Nicolas Sarkozy François Hollande Emmanuel Macron
Debatable or disputed rulers are in italics. Acting heads of state are denoted by an asterisk*. Millerand held the presidency in an acting capacity before being fully elected.
vte
German Confederations (1806–1871)
Confederation of the Rhine
Flag of France.svg 1806–1813	
Protector	
Napoleon I (1806–1813)
Prince primate	
Karl Theodor von Dalberg (1806–1813) Eugène de Beauharnais (1813)
German Confederation
Flag of Germany (3-2 aspect ratio).svg 1815–1866	
Presidents	
Francis I of Austria (1815–1835) Ferdinand I of Austria (1835–1848) Francis Joseph I of Austria (1850–1866)
Imperial regent	
Archduke Johann of Austria (1848–1849)
North German Confederation
Flag of the German Empire.svg 1867–1871	
President	
Wilhelm I of Prussia (1867–1871)
Chancellor	
Otto von Bismarck (1867–1871)
List of German monarchs History of Germany House of Habsburg-Lorraine House of Hohenzollern
vte
Pretenders to the French throne since 1792
Monarchy in exile (1792–1815)	
1792 Louis XVI 1793 Louis XVII 1795 Louis XVIII 1814 1815
Coat of arms of the House of Bourbon
Coat of arms of the House of Orléans
Imperial Eagle of the House of Bonaparte
Legitimist pretenders (1830–present)	
1830 Charles X 1836 Louis Antoine 1844 Henri 1883 Jean 1887 Charles 1909 Jacques 1931 Alphonse Charles 1936 Alphonse 1941 Jacques 1975 Alphonse 1989 Louis Alphonse present
Orléanist pretenders (1848–present)	
1848 Louis Philippe I 1850 Philippe 1894 Philippe 1926 Jean 1940 Henri 1999 Henri 2019 Jean present
Unionist succession (1830–present)	
1830 Charles X 1836 Louis Antoine 1844 Henri 1883 Philippe 1894 Philippe 1926 Jean 1940 Henri 1999 Henri 2019 Jean present
Bonapartist Prince Imperial (1814–present)	
1814 1815 Napoléon I 1821 Napoléon II 1832 Joseph 1844 Louis 1846 Napoléon III (Emperor 1852–1870) 1873 Napoléon 1879 Victor 1926 Louis 1997 Charles / Jean-Christophe present (disputed)
Bonapartist Prince Canino (1832–1924)	
1832 Lucien 1840 Charles 1857 Joseph 1865 Lucien 1895 Napoléon Charles 1899 Roland 1924
vte
Heads of state of France
Recognized as Francia from 481 to 843 – Recognized as West Francia from 843 to 987 – Recognized as France from 987 to present
Styled President of the Republic after 1871, except from 1940 to 1944 (Chief of State) and 1944 to 1947 (Chairman of the Provisional Government).
Detailed monarch family tree | Simplified monarch family tree
Merovingians (486–751)	
Clovis I Childebert I Chlothar I Charibert I Guntram Chilperic I Sigebert I Childebert II Chlothar II Dagobert I Sigebert II Clovis II Chlothar III Childeric II Theuderic III Clovis IV Childebert III Dagobert III Chilperic II Chlothar IV Theuderic IV Childeric III
Carolingians,
Robertians and Bosonids (751–987)	
Pepin the Short Carloman I Charlemagne (Charles I) Louis I Charles II Louis II Louis III Carloman II Charles the Fat OdoR Charles III Robert IR RudolphB Louis IV Lothair Louis V
House of Capet (987–1328)	
Hugh Capet Robert II Henry I Philip I Louis VI Louis VII Philip II Louis VIII Louis IX Philip III Philip IV Louis X John I Philip V Charles IV
House of Valois (1328–1589)	
Philip VI John II Charles V Charles VI Charles VII Louis XI Charles VIII Louis XII Francis I Henry II Francis II Charles IX Henry III
House of Lancaster (1422–1453)	
Henry VI of England
House of Bourbon (1589–1792)	
Henry IV Louis XIII Louis XIV Louis XV Louis XVI Louis XVII
First Republic (1792–1804)	
National Convention Directory Consulate
First Empire (1804–1815)	
Napoleon I Napoleon II
Bourbon Restoration (1815–1830)	
Louis XVIII Charles X Louis XIX Henry V
July Monarchy (1830–1848)	
Louis Philippe I
Second Republic (1848–1852)	
Jacques-Charles Dupont de l'Eure Executive Commission Louis-Eugène Cavaignac Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte
Second Empire (1852–1870)	
Napoleon III
Government of National Defense (1870–1871)	
Louis-Jules Trochu
Third Republic (1871–1940)	
Adolphe Thiers Patrice de Mac-Mahon Jules Armand Dufaure* Jules Grévy Maurice Rouvier* Sadi Carnot Charles Dupuy* Jean Casimir-Perier Charles Dupuy* Félix Faure Charles Dupuy* Émile Loubet Armand Fallières Raymond Poincaré Paul Deschanel Alexandre Millerand Frédéric François-Marsal* Gaston Doumergue Paul Doumer André Tardieu* Albert Lebrun
Vichy France (1940–1944)	
Philippe Pétain
Provisional Government (1944–1947)	
Charles de Gaulle Félix Gouin Georges Bidault Vincent Auriol Léon Blum
Fourth Republic (1947–1958)	
Vincent Auriol René Coty
Fifth Republic (1958–present)	
Charles de Gaulle Alain Poher* Georges Pompidou Alain Poher* Valéry Giscard d'Estaing François Mitterrand Jacques Chirac Nicolas Sarkozy François Hollande Emmanuel Macron
Debatable or disputed rulers are in italics. Acting heads of state are denoted by an asterisk*. Millerand held the presidency in an acting capacity before being fully elected.
vte
French Consulate (10 November 1799 – 18 May 1804)
Provisional consuls	
Napoleon Bonaparte Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès Roger Ducos
Bonabarte Premier consul.jpg
Bonaparte
First Consul
Consuls	
Napoleon Bonaparte Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérès Charles-François Lebrun, duc de Plaisance
Ministers	
Foreign Affairs	
Charles-Frédéric Reinhard Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord
Justice	
Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérès André Joseph Abrial Claude Ambroise Régnier
War	
Louis-Alexandre Berthier Lazare Carnot Louis-Alexandre Berthier
Finance	
Martin-Michel-Charles Gaudin
Police	
Joseph Fouché
Interior	
Pierre-Simon Laplace Lucien Bonaparte Jean-Antoine Chaptal
Navy and Colonies	
Marc Antoine Bourdon de Vatry Pierre-Alexandre-Laurent Forfait Denis Decrès
Secretary of State	
Hugues-Bernard Maret, duc de Bassano
Treasury	
François Barbé-Marbois
War Administration	
Jean François Aimé Dejean
Preceded by French Directory Followed by First cabinet of Napoleon
Authority control Edit this at Wikidata	
BIBSYS: 90272048 BNE: XX954040 BNF: cb12008245w (data) BPN: 55397934 GND: 118586408 HDS: 41455 ISNI: 0000 0001 2283 8283 LCCN: n79054933 LIR: 1735 LNB: 000029293 NARA: 12012599 NDL: 00450992 NKC: jn20000604140 NLA: 35372777 NSK: 000042500 RKD: 434741 ICCU: IT\ICCU\CFIV\096977 SELIBR: 207147 SNAC: w6qw49k5 SUDOC: 02733791X ULAN: 500122388 VIAF: 106964661 WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 106964661
Categories: Napoleon1769 births1821 deaths18th-century rulers in Europe18th-century heads of state of France19th-century monarchs in Europe19th-century French monarchs19th-century Princes of Andorra19th-century Kings of ItalyAmateur mathematiciansFrench art collectorsCharacters in War and PeaceCorsican politiciansDeaths from stomach cancerFrench commanders of the Napoleonic WarsFrench emperorsFrench exilesFrench military leaders of the French Revolutionary WarsFrench people of Italian descentFrench Roman CatholicsHouse of BonaparteKings of ItalyLeaders who took power by coupMembers of the French Academy of SciencesMonarchs imprisoned and detained during warDethroned monarchsMonarchs who abdicatedSelf-proclaimed monarchyPeople from AjaccioPeople of the First French EmpirePeople of Tuscan descentPrinces of AndorraPeople temporarily excommunicated by the Roman Catholic ChurchFrench Consulate
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadView sourceView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote
Wikisource
Languages
Acèh
Адыгэбзэ
Afrikaans
Alemannisch
አማርኛ
Ænglisc
Аҧсшәа
العربية
Aragonés
ܐܪܡܝܐ
অসমীয়া
Asturianu
Azərbaycanca
تۆرکجه
বাংলা
Bân-lâm-gú
Башҡортса
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎
Bikol Central
Български
Boarisch
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Буряад
Català
Чӑвашла
Cebuano
Čeština
Chavacano de Zamboanga
Chi-Chewa
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
डोटेली
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Emiliàn e rumagnòl
Español
Esperanto
Estremeñu
Euskara
Eʋegbe
فارسی
Fiji Hindi
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Furlan
Gaeilge
Gàidhlig
Galego
贛語
Gĩkũyũ
ગુજરાતી
客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî
한국어
Hausa
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
Kabɩyɛ
ಕನ್ನಡ
ქართული
Қазақша
Kiswahili
Kreyòl ayisyen
Kurdî
Кыргызча
Ladino
ລາວ
لۊری شومالی
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Лезги
Lietuvių
Ligure
Limburgs
Lingua Franca Nova
Livvinkarjala
La .lojban.
Luganda
Lumbaart
Magyar
मैथिली
Македонски
Malagasy
മലയാളം
Malti
मराठी
მარგალური
مصرى
مازِرونی
Bahasa Melayu
Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄
Mirandés
Монгол
မြန်မာဘာသာ
Dorerin Naoero
Nederlands
Nedersaksies
नेपाली
日本語
Napulitano
Нохчийн
Nordfriisk
Norsk
Norsk nynorsk
Occitan
ଓଡ଼ିଆ
Oromoo
Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча
ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
پنجابی
پښتو
Patois
ភាសាខ្មែរ
Picard
Piemontèis
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Português
Qaraqalpaqsha
Ripoarisch
Română
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
Русиньскый
Русский
Саха тыла
ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ
Gagana Samoa
संस्कृतम्
Sardu
Scots
Seeltersk
Shqip
Sicilianu
Simple English
سنڌي
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Soomaaliga
کوردی
Српски / srpski
Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
Basa Sunda
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
Татарча/tatarça
తెలుగు
ไทย
Türkçe
Twi
Тыва дыл
Удмурт
Українська
اردو
ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche
Vèneto
Vepsän kel’
Tiếng Việt
Võro
Walon
文言
West-Vlams
Winaray
吴语
ייִדיש
Yorùbá
粵語
Zazaki
Zeêuws
Žemaitėška
中文
Edit links
This page was last edited on 18 March 2019, at 16:11 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Corsica
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
For other uses, see Corsica (disambiguation).
"Corse" redirects here. For other uses, see Corse (disambiguation).
Collectivity of Corsica
Collectivité territoriale de Corse  (French)
Cullettività territuriale di Corsica  (Corsican)
Flag of Corsica
Flag
{{{coat_alt}}}
Coat of arms
Anthem: Dio vi salvi Regina (Italian; unofficial)
Location of Corsica within France
Location of Corsica within France
Status	French region
Capital
and largest city
Ajaccio[a]
Official languages	French
Demonym(s)	Corsican
Country	 French Republic
Government	Single territorial collectivity of France
• Presidential Head of State
Emmanuel Macron
• President of the Executive Council
Gilles Simeoni (Pè a Corsica)
• President of the Corsican Assembly
Jean-Guy Talamoni (Pè a Corsica)
Legislature	Corsican Assembly
Single territorial collectivity
• NOTRe law
7 August 2015
• Introduction
1 January 2018
Area
• Total
8,680 km2 (3,350 sq mi)
Population
• 2017 census
330,000
GDP (nominal)	2012 estimate
• Total
€9.74 billion
• Per capita
€30,423
Currency	Euro (€) (EUR)
Time zone	UTC+1 (CET)
• Summer (DST)
UTC+2 (CEST)
Calling code	+33
Corsica (/ˈkɔːrsɪkə/; French: Corse [kɔʁs]; Corsica in Corsican and Italian, pronounced [ˈkorsiga] and [ˈkɔrsika] respectively) is an island in the Mediterranean Sea and one of the 18 regions of France. It is located southeast of the French mainland and west of the Italian Peninsula, with the nearest land mass being the Italian island of Sardinia to the immediate south. A single chain of mountains makes up two-thirds of the island.[1]

While being part of Metropolitan France, Corsica is also designated as a territorial collectivity (collectivité territoriale) by law. As a territorial collectivity, Corsica enjoys a greater degree of autonomy than other French regions; for example, the Corsican Assembly is able to exercise limited executive powers. The island formed a single department until it was split in 1975 into two historical departments: Haute-Corse (Upper Corsica) and Corse-du-Sud (Southern Corsica), with its regional capital in Ajaccio, the prefecture city of Corse-du-Sud. Bastia, the prefecture city of Haute-Corse, is the second largest settlement in Corsica. The two departments, and the region of Corsica, merged again into a single territorial collectivity in 2018.

After being ruled by the Republic of Genoa since 1284, Corsica was briefly an Italian-speaking independent republic from 1755, until it was officially ceded by the Republic of Genoa to Louis XV as part of a pledge for debts and conquered in 1769. Napoleon Bonaparte was born the same year in Ajaccio, and his ancestral home, Maison Bonaparte, is today a significant visitor attraction and museum. Due to Corsica's historical ties with the Italian peninsula, the island retains to this day many Italian cultural elements: the native tongue is recognized as a regional language by the French government.


Contents
1	History
1.1	Prehistory and antiquity
1.2	Middle Ages and early-modern era
1.3	Rise and annexation of the Corsican Republic
1.4	19th century
1.5	Modern Corsica
2	Geography
2.1	Major communities
2.2	Climate
3	Ecology
3.1	Zones by altitude
3.2	Zones by region
3.3	Parc Naturel Régional de Corse
3.4	Extinct animals
4	Demographics
4.1	Immigration
5	Culture
5.1	Languages
5.2	Cuisine
5.3	Art
5.4	Sport
6	Administration
7	Economy
8	Transport
8.1	Airports
8.2	Railway
8.3	Seaports
9	Politics
10	See also
11	Notes
12	Bibliography
13	External links
History
Prehistory and antiquity
Main articles: Prehistory of Corsica, History of Corsica, and Medieval Corsica

The medieval influence of Pisa in Corsica can be seen in the Romanesque-Pisan style of the Church of Aregno.
The origin of the name Corsica is subject to much debate and remains a mystery. To the Ancient Greeks it was known as Kalliste, Corsis, Cyrnos, Cernealis, or Cirné. Of these Cyrnos, Cernealis, or Cirné derive from the most ancient Greek name of the island, "Σειρηνούσσαι" ("Seirinoussai", meaning of the Sirens), the very same Sirens mentioned in Homer's Odyssey.

Corsica has been occupied continuously since the Mesolithic era. It acquired an indigenous population that was influential in the Mediterranean during its long prehistory.

After a brief occupation by the Carthaginians, colonization by the ancient Greeks, and an only slightly longer occupation by the Etruscans, it was incorporated by the Roman Republic at the end of the First Punic War and, with Sardinia, in 238 BC became a province of the Roman Republic.[2] The Romans, who built a colony in Aléria, considered Corsica as one of the most backward regions of the Roman world. The island produced sheep, honey, resin and wax, and exported many slaves, not well considered because of their fierce and rebellious character.[2] Moreover, it was known for its cheap wines, exported to Rome, and was used as a place of relegation, one of the most famous exiles being the Roman philosopher Seneca.[3] Administratively, the island was divided in pagi, which in the Middle Ages became the pievi, the basic administrative units of the island until 1768.[2] During the diffusion of Christianity, which arrived quite early from Rome and the Tuscan harbors, Corsica was home to many martyrs and saints: among them, the most important are Saint Devota and Saint Julia, both patrons of the island. Corsica was integrated into Roman Italy by Emperor Diocletian (r. 284-305).

Middle Ages and early-modern era
In the 5th century, the western half of the Roman Empire collapsed, and the island was invaded by the Vandals and the Ostrogoths.[2] Briefly recovered by the Byzantines, it soon became part of the Kingdom of the Lombards. This made it a dependency of the March of Tuscany, which used it as an outpost against the Saracens.[4] Pepin the Short, king of the Franks and Charlemagne's father, expelled the Lombards and nominally granted Corsica to Pope Stephen II.[4] In the first quarter of the 11th century, Pisa and Genoa together freed the island from the threat of Arab invasion.[4] After that, the island came under the influence of the republic of Pisa.[4] To this period belong the many polychrome churches which adorn the island, and Corsica also experienced a massive immigration from Tuscany, which gave to the island its present toponymy and rendered the language spoken in the northern two-thirds of the island very close to the Tuscan dialect.[4] Due to that, then began also the traditional division of Corsica in two parts, along the main chain of mountains roughly going from Calvi to Porto-Vecchio: the eastern Banda di dentro, or Cismonte, more populated, evolved and open to the commerce with Italy, and the western Banda di fuori, or Pomonte, almost deserted, wild and remote.[4]


North African pirates frequently attacked Corsica, resulting in many Genoese towers being erected.
The crushing defeat experienced by Pisa in 1284 in the Battle of Meloria against Genoa had among its consequences the end of the Pisan rule and the beginning of the Genoese influence in Corsica:[4] this was contested initially by the King of Aragon, who in 1296 had received from the Pope the investiture over Sardinia and Corsica.[5] A popular revolution against this and the feudal lords, led by Sambucuccio d'Alando, got the aid of Genoa. After that, the Cismonte was ruled as a league of comuni and churches, after the Italian experience.[5] The following 150 years were a period of conflict, when the Genoese rule was contested by Aragon, the local lords, the comuni and the Pope: finally, in 1450 Genoa ceded the administration of the island to its main bank, the Bank of Saint George, which brought peace.[6]

In the 16th century, the island entered into the fight between Spain and France for the supremacy in Italy.[6] In 1553, a Franco-Ottoman fleet occupied Corsica, but the reaction of Spain and Genoa, led by Andrea Doria, reestablished the Genoese supremacy on the island, confirmed by the Peace of Cateau-Cambresis.[7] The unlucky protagonist of this episode was Sampiero di Bastelica, who would later come to be considered a hero of the island. Their power reinstated, the Genoese did not allow the Corsican nobility to share in the government of the island, and oppressed the inhabitants with a heavy tax burden: on the other hand, they introduced the chestnut tree on a large scale, improving the diet of the population, and built a chain of towers along the coast to defend Corsica from the attacks of the Barbary pirates from North Africa.[8] The period of peace lasted until 1729, when the refusal to pay taxes by a peasant sparked the general insurrection of the island against Genoa.[9]

Rise and annexation of the Corsican Republic
Main article: Corsican Republic

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
Find sources: "Corsica" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Seafront boulevard in Ajaccio, the island's capital and Napoleon I's birthplace
In 1729 the Corsican Revolution for independence from Genoa began, first led by Luiggi Giafferi and Giacinto Paoli, and later by Paoli's son, Pasquale Paoli. After 26 years of struggle against the Republic of Genoa (plus an ephemeral attempt to proclaim in 1736 an independent Kingdom of Corsica under the German adventurer Theodor von Neuhoff), the independent Corsican Republic was proclaimed in 1755 under the leadership of Pasquale Paoli and remained sovereign until 1769, when the island was conquered by France. The first Corsican Constitution was written in Italian (the language of culture in Corsica until the middle of the 19th century) by Paoli.

The Corsican Republic was unable to eject the Genoese from the major coastal fortresses (Calvi and Bonifacio). After the Corsican conquest of Capraia, a small island of the Tuscan Archipelago, in 1767, the Republic of Genoa, exhausted by forty years of fighting, decided to sell the island to France which, after its defeat in the Seven Years' War, was trying to reinforce its position in the Mediterranean. In 1768, with the Treaty of Versailles, the Genoese republic ceded all its rights on the island. After an initial successful resistance culminating with the victory at Borgo, the Corsican republic was crushed by a large French army led by the Count of Vaux at the Battle of Ponte Novu. This marked the end of Corsican sovereignty. Despite triggering the Corsican Crisis in Britain, whose government gave secret aid, no foreign military support came for the Corsicans. However, nationalist feelings still ran high. Despite the conquest, Corsica was not incorporated into the French state until 1789.

Following the outbreak of the French Revolution in 1789, Pasquale Paoli was able to return to Corsica from exile in Britain. In 1794, he invited British forces under Lord Hood to intervene to free Corsica from French rule. Anglo-Corsican forces drove the French from the island and established an Anglo-Corsican Kingdom. Following Spain's entry into the war, the British decided to withdraw from Corsica in 1796. Corsica returned to French rule.

19th century

Corsicans commemorating the anniversary of the birth of Napoleon
Despite being the birthplace of the Emperor, who had supported Paoli in his youth, the island was neglected by Napoleon's government.[10] In 1814, near the end of the Napoleonic Wars, Corsica was briefly occupied again by British troops. The Treaty of Bastia gave the British crown sovereignty over the island, but it was later repudiated by Lord Castlereagh who insisted that the island should be returned to a restored French monarchy.

After the restoration, the island was further neglected by the French state. Despite the presence of a middle class in Bastia and Ajaccio, Corsica remained an otherwise primitive place, whose economy consisted mainly of a subsistence agriculture, and whose population constituted a pastoral society, dominated by clans and the rules of vendetta. The code of vendetta required Corsicans to seek deadly revenge for offences against their family's honor. Between 1821 and 1852, no fewer than 4,300 murders were perpetrated in Corsica.[11] In this period a myth proved of interest as an historical fact by virtue of its being introduced by Herodotus and furthered by writers like Mérimée and Gregorovius, of Corsica as having been populated by Arcadians (Oenotrians and citizens of Phocaea), fierce and loyal people. During the first half of the century, the people of Corsica belonged still to the Italian cultural world: the bourgeoisie sent children to Pisa to study, official acts were enacted in Italian and most books were printed in Italian.[12] Moreover, many islanders sympathised with the national struggle which was taking place in nearby Italy in those years: several political refugees from the peninsula, like Niccolò Tommaseo, spent years in the island, while some Corsicans, like Count Leonetto Cipriani, took active part in the fights for Italian independence.

Despite all that, during those years the Corsicans began to feel a stronger and stronger attraction to France. The reasons for that are manifold: the knowledge of the French language, which thanks to the mandatory primary school started to penetrate among the local youth, the high prestige of French culture, the awareness of being part of a big, powerful state, the possibility of well-paid jobs as civil servants, both in the island, in the mainland and in the colonies, the prospect of serving the French army during the wars for the conquest of the colonial empire, the introduction of steamboats, which reduced the travel time between mainland France from the island drastically, and — last but not least — Napoleon himself, whose existence alone constituted an indissoluble link between France and Corsica. Thanks to all these factors by around 1870 Corsica had landed in the French cultural world.[12]

From the 19th century into the mid-20th century, Corsicans also grew closer to the French nation through participation in the French Empire. Compared to much of Metropolitan France, Corsica was poor and many Corsicans emigrated. While Corsicans emigrated globally, especially to many South American countries, many chose to move within the French Empire which acted as a conduit for emigration and eventual return, as many young Corsican men could find better job opportunities in the far corners of the Empire where many other French hesitated to go. In many parts of the Empire, Corsicans were strongly represented, such as in Saigon where in 1926 12% of European were from Corsica.[13] Across the French Empire, many Corsicans retained a sense of community by establishing organizations where they would meet regularly, keep one another informed of developments in Corsica, and come to one anothers’ aid in times of need.[14]

Modern Corsica

Monument to the French Resistance during WWII in Solaro (plaine orientale)
Corsica paid a high price for the French victory in the First World War: agriculture was disrupted by the years-long absence of almost all of the young workers, and the percentage of dead or wounded Corsicans in the conflict was double that of those from metropolitan France. Moreover, the protectionist policies of the French government, started in the 1880s and never stopped, had ruined the Corsican export of wine and olive oil, and forced many young Corsicans to emigrate to mainland France or to the Americas. As a reaction to these conditions, a nationalist movement was born in the 1920s around the newspaper A Muvra, having as its objective the autonomy of the island from France. In the 1930s, many exponents of this movement became irredentist, seeing annexation of the island to fascist Italy as the only solution to its problems. Under Benito Mussolini annexation of Corsica had become one of the main goals of Italy's unification policy.

After the collapse of France to the German Wehrmacht in 1940, Corsica came under the rule of the Vichy French regime, which was collaborating with Nazi Germany.[15] In November 1942 the island, following the Anglo-American landings in North Africa was occupied by Italian and German forces. After the Italian armistice in September 1943, Italian and Free French Forces pushed the Germans out of the island, making Corsica the first French Department to be freed.[16] Subsequently, the US military established 17 airfields, nicknamed "USS Corsica", which served as bases for attacks on targets in German-occupied Italy.


Brando in the Haute-Corse department
During the May 1958 crisis, French paratroopers landed on Corsica on 24 May, garrisoning the island in a bloodless action called Opération Corse.[17]

Between the late fifties and the seventies, the project of building a nuclear polygon in the mines of Argentella, the immigration of 18,000 former settlers from Algeria ("Pieds-Noirs") in the eastern plains, and continuing chemical pollution (Fanghi Rossi) from mainland Italy increased tensions between the indigenous inhabitants and the French government. Tensions escalated until they eventually erupted in the occasion of an armed police assault on a pieds-noirs-owned wine cellar in Aleria, occupied by Corsican nationalists on 23 August 1975: Corsican nationalism has been a feature of the island's politics ever since, with several groups and nationalist parties active calling for the protection of the Corsican cultural heritage and greater autonomy, or even the restoration of the island's full independence. Some radical nationalists, organizing themselves in a group known as FLNC, carried out a violent conflict, which included a number of bombings and assassinations targeting buildings and officials of the French government, both from the mainland and Corsica itself. Periodic flare-ups of raids and killings culminated in the assassination of the Prefect Claude Érignac in 1998.

In 2013, Corsica hosted the first three stages of the 100th Tour de France, which passed through the island for the first time in the event's 110-year history.

Geography

The Bay of Calvi: Corsica is the most mountainous Mediterranean island.

A view of Speloncato
Corsica was formed about 250 million years ago with the uplift of a granite backbone on the western side. About 50 million years ago sedimentary rock was pressed against this granite, forming the schists of the eastern side. It is the most mountainous island in the Mediterranean, a "mountain in the sea".[18]

It is also the fourth largest island in the Mediterranean, after Sicily, Sardinia and Cyprus.

It is 183 km (114 mi) long at longest, 83 km (52 mi) wide at widest, has 1,000 km (620 mi) of coastline, more than 200 beaches, and is very mountainous, with Monte Cinto as the highest peak at 2,706 m (8,878 ft) and around 120 other summits of more than 2,000 m (6,600 ft). Mountains comprise two-thirds of the island, forming a single chain. Forests make up 20% of the island.

About 3,500 km2 (1,400 sq mi) of the total surface area of 8,680 km2 (3,350 sq mi) is dedicated to nature reserves (Parc naturel régional de Corse), mainly in the interior.[19] Corsica contains the GR20, one of Europe's most notable hiking trails.

The island is 90 km (56 mi) from Tuscany in Italy and 170 km (110 mi) from the Côte d'Azur in France. It is separated from Sardinia to the south by the Strait of Bonifacio, which is a minimum of 11 km (6.8 mi) wide.[19]

Major communities
Main articles: Communes of the Haute-Corse department and Communes of the Corse-du-Sud department
In 2005 the population of Corsica was settled in approximately 360 communities.[20]

Climate

Köppen climate classification types of Corsica
Under the Köppen climate classification scheme, coastal regions are characterized by a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (Csa). Further inland, a warm-summer Mediterranean climate (Csb) is more common. At the highest elevation locations, small areas with a subarctic climate (Dsc, Dfc) and the rare cold-summer Mediterranean climate (Csc) can be found.

The station of Sari-Solenzara records the highest year-round temperatures of Metropolitan France with an annual average of 16,41 °C over the 1981–2010 period. Sunshine hours are not available over this period but is 2715 h over 2008–2016.

Climate data for Sari-Solenzara, south-eastern part of island
Month	Jan	Feb	Mar	Apr	May	Jun	Jul	Aug	Sep	Oct	Nov	Dec	Year
Average high °C (°F)	13.6
(56.5)	14.0
(57.2)	15.9
(60.6)	18.1
(64.6)	22.2
(72.0)	26.1
(79.0)	29.4
(84.9)	29.7
(85.5)	26.3
(79.3)	22.1
(71.8)	17.4
(63.3)	14.3
(57.7)	20.76
(69.37)
Daily mean °C (°F)	9.7
(49.5)	9.8
(49.6)	11.6
(52.9)	13.7
(56.7)	17.8
(64.0)	21.3
(70.3)	24.5
(76.1)	24.8
(76.6)	21.7
(71.1)	18.0
(64.4)	13.6
(56.5)	10.7
(51.3)	16.41
(61.54)
Average low °C (°F)	5.8
(42.4)	5.6
(42.1)	7.3
(45.1)	9.3
(48.7)	12.9
(55.2)	16.5
(61.7)	19.5
(67.1)	19.9
(67.8)	17.1
(62.8)	13.9
(57.0)	9.8
(49.6)	7.1
(44.8)	12.06
(53.71)
Average precipitation mm (inches)	71.1
(2.80)	58.3
(2.30)	61.2
(2.41)	79.9
(3.15)	45.8
(1.80)	25.1
(0.99)	12.1
(0.48)	28.4
(1.12)	88.3
(3.48)	125.6
(4.94)	94.2
(3.71)	103.7
(4.08)	793.7
(31.25)
Average precipitation days (≥ 1 mm)	6.2	6.1	6.5	7.5	4.9	3.0	1.5	2.2	4.8	7.1	8.1	8.7	66.6
Source: Météo France[21]
Climate data for Ajaccio, central-western part of island
Month	Jan	Feb	Mar	Apr	May	Jun	Jul	Aug	Sep	Oct	Nov	Dec	Year
Average high °C (°F)	13.3
(55.9)	13.7
(56.7)	15.0
(59.0)	17.4
(63.3)	20.9
(69.6)	24.5
(76.1)	27.6
(81.7)	27.7
(81.9)	25.4
(77.7)	22.0
(71.6)	17.5
(63.5)	14.4
(57.9)	19.95
(67.91)
Daily mean °C (°F)	8.6
(47.5)	9.0
(48.2)	10.1
(50.2)	12.3
(54.1)	15.7
(60.3)	19.1
(66.4)	21.9
(71.4)	22.1
(71.8)	19.9
(67.8)	16.7
(62.1)	12.6
(54.7)	9.6
(49.3)	14.80
(58.64)
Average low °C (°F)	3.9
(39.0)	4.3
(39.7)	5.3
(41.5)	7.3
(45.1)	10.6
(51.1)	13.8
(56.8)	16.2
(61.2)	16.5
(61.7)	14.4
(57.9)	11.4
(52.5)	7.7
(45.9)	4.8
(40.6)	9.68
(49.42)
Average precipitation mm (inches)	73.8
(2.91)	69.7
(2.74)	58.1
(2.29)	52.0
(2.05)	40.2
(1.58)	19.0
(0.75)	11.0
(0.43)	19.9
(0.78)	43.6
(1.72)	87.0
(3.43)	95.9
(3.78)	75.5
(2.97)	645.7
(25.42)
Average precipitation days (≥ 1 mm)	8.9	8.7	8.3	7.2	5.7	2.8	1.3	2.4	4.3	7.3	8.6	9.1	74.6
Mean monthly sunshine hours	133.3	145.0	189.1	225.0	282.1	321.0	365.8	331.7	264.0	210.8	150.0	127.1	2,744.9
Source: Hong Kong Observatory[22]
Climate data for Bastia, north-eastern part of island
Month	Jan	Feb	Mar	Apr	May	Jun	Jul	Aug	Sep	Oct	Nov	Dec	Year
Average high °C (°F)	13.6
(56.5)	13.8
(56.8)	15.6
(60.1)	17.8
(64.0)	22.0
(71.6)	25.8
(78.4)	29.1
(84.4)	29.3
(84.7)	25.8
(78.4)	21.9
(71.4)	17.4
(63.3)	14.5
(58.1)	20.6
(69.0)
Daily mean °C (°F)	9.1
(48.4)	9.4
(48.9)	10.8
(51.4)	12.9
(55.2)	16.3
(61.3)	20.0
(68.0)	23.2
(73.8)	23.3
(73.9)	20.6
(69.1)	17.1
(62.8)	12.9
(55.2)	10.1
(50.2)	15.5
(59.9)
Average low °C (°F)	5.1
(41.2)	4.9
(40.8)	6.7
(44.1)	8.8
(47.8)	12.4
(54.3)	16.0
(60.8)	19.0
(66.2)	19.4
(66.9)	16.5
(61.7)	13.3
(55.9)	9.2
(48.6)	6.3
(43.3)	11.5
(52.6)
Average precipitation mm (inches)	67
(2.6)	57
(2.2)	60
(2.4)	76
(3.0)	50
(2.0)	41
(1.6)	13
(0.5)	21
(0.8)	81
(3.2)	127
(5.0)	114
(4.5)	93
(3.7)	800
(31.5)
Mean monthly sunshine hours	134	158	192	214	268	296	345	304	232	176	133	128	2,580
Source: Quid 2004, page 618 and Météo-France, data for 1981–2010
Ecology
Corsica
Native name: Corsica
Nickname: L’Île de Beauté
The Isle of Beauty
Corse region relief location map.jpg
Topography of Corsica
Corsica is located in FranceCorsicaCorsica
Corsica (France)
Geography
Location	Mediterranean Sea
Area	8,680 km2 (3,350 sq mi)
Length	184 km (114.3 mi)
Width	83 km (51.6 mi)
Coastline	1,000 km (600 mi)
Highest elevation	2,706 m (8,878 ft)
Highest point	Monte Cinto
Région	Corsica
Largest settlement	Ajaccio (pop. 63,723)
Demographics
Population	322,120 (January 2013)
Pop. density	37 /km2 (96 /sq mi)
Zones by altitude
The island is divided into three major ecological zones by altitude.[23] Below 600 metres (2,000 ft) is the coastal zone, which features a Mediterranean climate, with hot, dry summers and mild, rainy winters. The natural vegetation is Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and shrubs. The coastal lowlands are part of the Tyrrhenian-Adriatic sclerophyllous and mixed forests ecoregion, in which forests and woodlands of evergreen sclerophyll oaks predominate, chiefly holm oak (Quercus ilex) and cork oak (Quercus suber). Much of the coastal lowlands have been cleared for agriculture, grazing and logging, which have reduced the forests considerably.

There is considerable birdlife in Corsica. One famous example is the bearded vulture. In some cases Corsica is a delimited part of the species range. For example, the subspecies of hooded crow, Corvus cornix ssp cornix occurs in Corsica, but no further south.[24]

From 600 to 1,800 m (2,000 to 5,900 ft) is a temperate montane zone. The mountains are cooler and wetter, and home to the Corsican montane broadleaf and mixed forests ecoregion, which supports diverse forests of oak, pine, and broadleaf deciduous trees, with vegetation more typical of northern Europe. The population lives predominantly below 900 m (3,000 ft), with only shepherds and hikers at 600 to 900 m (2,000 to 3,000 ft).

From 1,800 to 2,700 m (5,900 to 8,900 ft) is a high alpine zone. Vegetation is sparse. This zone is uninhabited.

Zones by region
[icon]	
This section is empty. You can help by adding to it. (March 2014)
Parc Naturel Régional de Corse
The island has a natural park (Parc Naturel Régional de Corse, Parcu di Corsica), which protects rare animal and plant species. The Park was created in 1972 and includes the Golfe de Porto, the Scandola Nature Reserve (a UNESCO World Heritage Site), and some of the highest mountains on the island. Scandola cannot be reached on foot, but people can gain access by boat from the village of Galéria and Porto (Ota). Two endangered subspecies of hoofed mammals, the European mouflon (Ovis orientalis musimon) and Corsican red deer (Cervus elaphus corsicanus) inhabit the park. The Corsican red deer was re-introduced after it was extinct due to over hunting. This Corsican subspecies was the same that survived on Sardinia, so it's endemic. There are other species endemic to Corsica especially in the upper mountain ranges, i.e. Corsican nuthatch, Corsican fire salamander and Corsican brook salamander and many plant subspecies.

Extinct animals
Corsica, like all the other Mediterranean islands, was home to indigenous animals of the Pleistocene, some endemic to it and some coming to it and Sardinia (as Sardinia was joined to Corsica for much of the Pleistocene). After the proliferation of humans in the Mesolithic, these began to disappear, partly from extinction of the species, and partly from eradication only in Corsica. However, it is now known that many species managed to survive the Mesolithic, and many were still present well into recorded history.[25]

The globally extinct species are the Sardinian dhole, Megaloceros cazioti, Corsican giant shrew, Tyrrhenian mole, Sardinian pika, Corsican-Sardinian vole, Corsican-Sardinian wood mouse, Bubo insularis and Athene angelis. Birds were especially hard-hit. Some that were eradicated from the vicinity are Haliaeetus albicilla and Aquila heliaca.

Demographics
See also: Corsican people

Saint-Nicolas church in Feliceto
Corsica has a population of 322,120 inhabitants (January 2013 estimate).[26]

At the 2011 census, 56.3% of the inhabitants of Corsica had been born in Corsica, 28.6% were born in Continental France, 0.3% were from Overseas France, and 14.8% were natives of foreign countries.[27]

The majority of the foreign immigrants in Corsica come from the Maghreb (particularly Moroccans, who made up 33.5% of all immigrants in Corsica at the 2011 census), and from Southern Europe (particularly Portuguese, 22.7% of immigrants on the island), and Italians (13.7%).[28]

Immigration
Place of birth of residents of Corsica
(at the 1982, 1990, 1999, and 2011 censuses)
Census	Born in Corsica	Born in
Continental France	Born in
Overseas France	Born in foreign
countries with French
citizenship at birth¹	Immigrants2
2011	56.3%	28.6%	0.3%	5.0%	9.8%
from the Maghreb3	from Southern Europe4	from the rest of the world
4.3%	3.8%	1.7%
1999	59.5%	24.8%	0.3%	5.5%	10.0%
from the Maghreb3	from Southern Europe4	from the rest of the world
5.3%	3.3%	1.4%
1990	62.0%	21.3%	0.2%	6.0%	10.5%
1982	61.6%	20.4%	0.2%	6.0%	11.8%
¹Essentially Pieds-Noirs who resettled in Corsica after the independence of Tunisia, Morocco and Algeria, many of whom had Corsican ancestry.
2An immigrant is by French definition a person born in a foreign country and who did not have French citizenship at birth. Note that an immigrant may have acquired French citizenship since moving to France, but is still listed as an immigrant in French statistics. On the other hand, persons born in France with foreign citizenship (the children of immigrants) are not listed as immigrants.
3Morocco, Tunisia, Algeria
4Portugal, Italy, Spain
Source: INSEE[27][28][29]
Culture
Languages
Main articles: Corsican language and Ligurian (Romance language)

Chart of the dialects of the Corsican language, which also extends into northern Sardinia.
As in the rest of France, French is Corsica's official language and is now spoken throughout the island. Italian was the official language of Corsica under the plurisecular Pisan and Genoese rule, and was retained as the island's administrative language until 1859[30]. Corsican (corsu), an Italo-Dalmatian minority language that is closely related to Tuscan (toscano), has a better prospect of survival than most other French regional languages: Corsican is in fact, after French, the most widely spoken language on the island. However, Corsican lacks official status, and today it is estimated that only 10% of Corsica's population speak the language natively, with 50% having some sort of proficiency in it.[31]

The language is divided into the two main varieties of corsu supranacciu ("Northern Corsican") and corsu suttanacciu ("Southern Corsican"), spoken respectively northeast and southwest of the Girolata - Porto Vecchio line. This division was primarily due to the massive immigration from Tuscany which took place in Corsica during the lower Middle Ages: as a result, the supranacciu or cismontano became very similar to the Western Tuscan dialects, while the suttanacciu or oltramontano could keep more original characteristics which make this group of dialects relatively similar to a Southern Romance language like Sardinian (sardu).[32][33] Therefore, due to the differences between the main dialectal varieties, most linguists classify Corsican as an Italo-Dalmatian language,[34] while some others place it in the Southern Romance family, together with Sardinian.[35]

It should also be noted that fewer and fewer people speak a dialect of Ligurian, known as bunifazzinu,[36] in what has long been a language island, Bonifacio, and in Ajaccio, the aghjaccinu dialect. In Cargèse, a village established by Greek immigrants in the 17th century, Greek (ελληνικά) was the traditional language:[37] whereas it has long disappeared from spoken conversation, ancient Greek is still the liturgical language and the village has many Greek Orthodox parishes.

Cuisine
Main article: Cuisine of Corsica
From the mountains to the plains and sea, many ingredients play a role. Game such as wild boar (Cingale, Singhjari) is popular. There also is seafood and river fish such as trout. Delicacies such as figatellu (also named as ficateddu), made with liver, coppa, ham (prizuttu), lonzu are made from Corsican pork (porcu nustrale). Characteristic among the cheeses is brocciu (similar to ricotta), which is used as a fresh ingredient in many dishes, from first courses (sturzapreti) to cakes (fiadone). Other cheeses, like casgiu merzu ("rotten cheese", the Corsican counterpart of the Sardinian casu marzu), casgiu veghju are made from goat or sheep milk. Chestnuts are the main ingredient in the making of pulenta castagnina and cakes (falculelle). A variety of alcohol also exists ranging from aquavita (brandy), red and white Corsican wines (Vinu Corsu), muscat wine (plain or sparkling), and the famous "Cap Corse" apéritif produced by Mattei. The herbs which are part of Maquis (Corsican: machja) and the chestnuts and oak nuts of the Corsican forests are eaten by local animals, resulting in the noticeable taste in the food there.

Art
See also: Music of Corsica
Corsica has produced a number of known artists:

Alizée
Martha Angelici (opera singer)
A Filetta (polyphonic chant group)
Canta U Populu Corsu (band)
Laetitia Casta (model/actress)
Baptiste Giabiconi (model/singer)
Julien de Casabianca (cineast)
Jérôme Ferrari (writer)
Patrick Fiori (singer)
Petru Guelfucci (singer)
José Luccioni (opera singer)
Gaston Micheletti (opera singer)
I Muvrini (band)
Jenifer (singer)
François Lanzi (painter)
Ange Leccia (visual art)
Henri Padovani (musician; original guitarist for The Police)
Thierry de Peretti (cineast)
Marie-Claude Pietragalla (dancer)
Jean-Paul Poletti (singer)
Robin Renucci (comedian)
Tino Rossi (singer)
César Vezzani (opera singer)
Sport
AC Ajaccio and SC Bastia are the two main football teams, which have played the Ligue 1 frequently since the 1960s and contest the Corsica derby. Since 2015, Gazélec Ajaccio, the city's second team, has begun playing in the Ligue 1. The Tour de Corse is a rally held since 1956, which was a round of the World Rally Championship from 1973 to 2008 and later the Intercontinental Rally Challenge and European Rally Championship. The Tour de Corse returned as a World Rally Championship round in 2015.

Administration

Map of Corsica
Before 1975, Corsica was a départment of the French region of Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur. In 1975 two new départements, Haute-Corse and Corse-du-Sud, were created by splitting the hitherto united departement of Corsica.

On 2 March 1982, a law was passed that gave Corsica the status of territorial collectivity (collectivité territoriale), abolishing the Corsican Regional Council. Unlike the regional councils, the Corsican Assembly has executive powers over the island.

In 1992, three institutions were formed in the territorial collectivity of Corsica:

The Executive Council of Corsica, which exercises the type of executive functions held in other French regions by the presidents of the Regional Councils. It ensures the stability and consistency needed to manage the affairs of the territory
The Corsican Assembly, a deliberative, unicameral legislative body with greater powers than the regional councils on the mainland
The Economic, Social and Cultural Council of Corsica, an advisory body
A local referendum held in 2003, aimed at abolishing the two départements to leave a territorial collectivity with extended powers, was voted down by a narrow margin. However, the issue of Corsican autonomy and greater powers for the Corsican Assembly continues to hold sway over Corsican politics.

Economy

Corsica's coastline is a major driver for tourism – coastline by the town of Propriano
Tourism plays a big part in the Corsican economy. The island's climate, mountains, and coastlines make it popular among tourists. The island has not had the same level of intensive development as other parts of the Mediterranean and is thus mainly unspoiled. Tourism is particularly concentrated in the area around Porto-Vecchio and Bonifacio in the south of the island and Calvi in the northwest.

In 1584 the Genoese governor ordered all farmers and landowners to plant four trees yearly; a chestnut, olive, fig, and mulberry tree. Many communities owe their origin and former richness to the ensuing chestnut woods.[38] Chestnut bread keeps fresh for as long as two weeks.[39] Corsica produces gourmet cheese, wine, sausages, and honey for sale in mainland France and for export. Corsican honey, of which there are six official varieties, is certified as to its origin (Appellation d'origine contrôlée) by the French National Institute of Origin and Quality (Institut National des Appellations d'Origine – INAO).

Corsica's main exports are granite and marble, tannic acid, cork, cheese, wine, citrus fruit, olive oil and cigarettes.[40]

Transport
Airports
Corsica has four international airports:

Ajaccio Napoleon Bonaparte Airport
Bastia – Poretta Airport
Calvi – Sainte-Catherine Airport
Figari–Sud Corse Airport (near Bonifacio and Porto Vecchio in the south)
All airports are served by regional French airline Air Corsica, as well as Air France which mainly offers connections to Paris-Orly. Budget carriers such as EasyJet and Ryanair offer seasonal connections to different cities in Europe.

Railway
The island has 232 kilometres (144 miles) of metre gauge railway. The main line runs between Bastia and Ajaccio and there is a branch line from Ponte Leccia to Calvi. Chemins de Fer de la Corse (CFC) is the name of the regional rail network serving the French island of Corsica. For a list of stations, see Railway stations in Corsica. The railroad retains the air of a friendly local railroad and is an excellent way to get around the island, for both the inhabitants and tourists.[41]

There is a third line along the east coast that is not in use due to heavy damage during World War II. John Smith and his consortium announced their intention to invest and redevelop in 2018. There has been talk of restoration, but no progress has occurred.

Seaports

Port of Ajaccio

Looking north across the Strait of Bonifacio from the northern tip of Sardinia; the southern coast of Corsica is barely visible through the haze of distance.
Corsica is well connected to the European mainland (Italy and France) by various car ferry lines. The island's busiest seaport is Bastia, which saw more than 2.5 million passengers in 2012.[42] The second busiest seaport is Ajaccio, followed by L'Île-Rousse and Calvi. Propriano and Porto Vecchio in the south also have smaller ferry docks and are seasonally served from France (Marseille), while Bonifacio's harbour is only frequented by smaller car ferries from the neighbouring island of Sardinia.

The ferry companies serving Corsica are Corsica Ferries - Sardinia Ferries (from Savona, Livorno and Piombino in Italy; Toulon and Nice in France), SNCM (from Marseille, Toulon and Nice in France), CMN - La Méridionale (from Marseille in France) and Moby Lines (from Livorno and Genoa in Italy).[43][44][45][46]

Politics

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
Find sources: "Corsica" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (May 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
There are several groups and two nationalist parties (the autonomist Femu a Corsica and the separatist Corsica Libera) active on the island calling for some degree of Corsican autonomy from France or even full independence. Generally speaking, regionalist proposals focus on the promotion of the Corsican language, more power for local governments, and some exemptions from national taxes in addition to those already applying to Corsica.

The French government is opposed to full independence but has at times shown support for some level of autonomy. There is support on the island for proposals for greater autonomy, but polls show that a large majority of Corsicans are opposed to full independence.[47][48]

In 1972, the Italian company Montedison dumped toxic waste, which appeared to be red mud, off the Corsican coast, the most visible effects being cetaceans found dead on the shores. At that time the Corsican people felt that the French government did not support them. To stop the poisoning, one ship carrying toxic waste from Italy was bombed.[49]


Corsican nationalists have used means such as the removal of French names (most of them of Italian origin) on road signs.
Nationalist organisations started to seek money, using tactics similar to those of the Mafia, to fund violence. Some groups that claim to support Corsican independence, such as the National Liberation Front of Corsica, have carried out a violent campaign since the 1970s that includes bombings and assassinations, usually targeting buildings and officials representing the French government or Corsicans themselves for political reasons.[50] A war between two rival independence groups led to several deaths in the 1990s. The peaceful occupation of a pied-noir vineyard in Aléria in 1975 marked a turning point when the French government responded with overwhelming force, generating sympathy for the independence groups among the Corsican population.

In 2000, Prime Minister Lionel Jospin agreed to grant increased autonomy to Corsica. The proposed autonomy for Corsica would have included greater protection for the Corsican language (Corsu), the island's traditional language, whose practice and teaching, like other regional or minority languages in France, had been discouraged in the past. According to the UNESCO classification, the Corsican language is currently in danger of becoming extinct.[51] However, plans for increased autonomy were opposed by the Gaullist opposition in the French National Assembly, who feared that they would lead to calls for autonomy from other régions (such as Brittany, Alsace, or Provence), eventually threatening France's unity as a country.[52]

In a referendum on 6 July 2003, a narrow majority of Corsican voters opposed a proposal by the government of Jean-Pierre Raffarin and then-Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy that would have suppressed the two départements of the island and granted greater autonomy to the territorial collectivity of Corsica.[53]

On 13 December 2015, the regionalist coalition Pè a Corsica (English: For Corsica), supported by both Femu a Corsica and Corsica Libera and led by Gilles Siméoni, won the territorial elections with a percentage of 36.9%.[54][55]

On December 17, 2015, Jean Guy Talamoni was elected President of the Assembly of Corsica and Gilles Simeoni was elected Executive President of the Council of the Region. In addition, legislation granting Corsica a greater degree of autonomy was passed.[56]

See also
flag	France portal
icon	Islands portal
	Mediterranean portal
	Corsica portal
Corsican nationalism
Corsican language
Italian irredentism in Corsica
Corsican immigration (Puerto Rico, Venezuela)
Corsican Workers' Trade Union
"Dio vi salvi Regina", the unofficial Corsican anthem
GR 20
Aiguilles de Bavella
List of châteaux in Corsica
Mariana, Corsica
University of Corsica Pascal Paoli
Notes
 Ajaccio is the prefecture of the Corsican region.
 "Corsica: The Mountain in the Sea". Retrieved 2018-11-16.
 Bertarelli (1929), p.41
 Pais, Ettore (1999). Storia della Sardegna e della Corsica durante il periodo romano (in Italian). Nuoro: Ilisso. pp. 76–77. ISBN 88-85098-92-4.
 Bertarelli (1929), p.42
 Bertarelli (1929), p.43
 Bertarelli (1929), p.45
 Bertarelli (1929), p.46
 "Ancient Corsica beckons with deserted beaches and historic structures". The Baltimore Sun. 1 March 1992
 Bertarelli (1929), p.48
 Howard, John E., Letters and Documents of Napoleon: Vol. 1 Rise to Power. New York: Oxford University Press, 1961.
 Gregorovius, Ferdinand (1855). Wanderings in Corsica: its history and its heroes. p. 196.
 Ravis-Giordani (1991), p. 112–14
 Echo de la Corse (May–June 1929). "Inepuissable pepiniere de soldats et de coloniaux". Saigon-Cyrnos: Bulletin de l’Amicale Corse de la Cochinchine et du Cambodge. 43: 13–14.
 Guelfi, A.D. (April 1931). "Les Corses hors de Corse partout presents toujours unis". Saigon-Cyrnos: Bulletin de l’Amicale Corse de la Cochinchine et du Cambodge. 58: 13–14.
 Azéma, Jean-Pierre; Wieviorka, Olivier (1997). Vichy, 1940-44 (in French). Paris: Perrin. pp. 231–33.
 Paletti, C. (1999). Un'operazione riuscita: Corsica settembre 1943 (in Italian). Rome: Ufficio Storico Stato maggiore Esercito.
 "Jacques Massu obituary". Timesonline.co.uk. Retrieved 2012-10-27.
 Mouillot, F. (2008). "Corsica". Mediterranean Island Landscapes: Natural and Cultural Approaches. Springer. pp. 223–225.
 Price, Gillian. Walking on Corsica: Long-Distance and Short Walks. Cicerone Press Limited. p. 9. ISBN 1-85284-387-X.
 Keyser, William (2005). "Corsican Villages and Towns" (PDF). Corsica Isula. Retrieved 29 April 2008.
 "Climatological Information for Sari-Solenzara, France" – Météo France
 "Climatological Information for Ajaccio, France" – Hong Kong Observatory
 Gregory, Desmond (1985). The ungovernable rock: a history of the Anglo-Corsican Kingdom and its role in Britain's Mediterranean strategy during the Revolutionary War, 1793–1797. London: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press. p. 16. ISBN 0-8386-3225-4.
 Hogan, C. Michael (2009). N. Stromberg, ed. Hooded Crow: Corvus cornix – via GlobalTwitcher.com.
 MacPhee, R.D.E.; Hans-Dieter Sues (1999). Extinctions in Near Time: Causes, Contexts, and Consequences. Springer. p. 179. ISBN 0-306-46092-0.
 "Estimation de population au 1er janvier, par région, sexe et grande classe d'âge – Année 2013" (in French). INSEE. Retrieved 2014-02-20.
 "Fichier Données harmonisées des recensements de la population de 1968 à 2011" (in French). INSEE. Archived from the original on 25 October 2014. Retrieved 2014-10-25.
 "IMG1B – Les immigrés par sexe, âge et pays de naissance" (in French). INSEE. Retrieved 2014-10-25.
 "D_FD_IMG2 – Base France par départements – Lieux de naissance à l'étranger selon la nationalité" (in French). INSEE. Retrieved 2013-06-25.
 Abalain, Hervé, (2007) Le français et les langues historiques de la France, Éditions Jean-Paul Gisserot, p.113
 "Euromosaic-Index1". uoc.edu. Open University of Catalonia. Retrieved 2012-10-27.
 Bertoni, Giulio (1916). Italia dialettale (in Italian). Milano: Hoepli.
 Devoto, Giacomo (1974). Il linguaggio d'Italia (in Italian). Milano: Rizzoli.
 Harris, Martin; Vincent, Nigel (1997). Romance Languages. London: Routlegde. ISBN 0-415-16417-6.
 Nordhoff, Sebastian; Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2013). "Subfamily: Italo-Dalmatian". Glottolog 2.2.
 Enciclopedia Treccani - Dialetti liguri
 Nicholas, Nick. "How Greek were the Greeks of Corsica?" (PDF). tlg.uci.edu. Thesaurus Linguae Graeceae. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 29, 2012.
 "The Chestnut Tree". terracorsa.info.
 Ward, Artemas (1911). "Bread". The Grocer's Encyclopedia – Encyclopedia of Foods and Beverages. New York. p. 76. Archived from the original on February 11, 2016. Retrieved October 10, 2018.
 "The Region of Corsica". french-at-a-touch.com. Archived from the original on 23 March 2014. Retrieved 2014-03-23.
 For a detailed description of the railroad system see Simms, Wilfrid S., "The Railways of Corsica" (1997)(ISBN 0952888122).
 "EU transport in figures - Statistical Pocketbook 2012" (PDF), European Commission
 Corsica Ferries - Official Website
 SNCM - Official Website
 Compagnie méridionale de navigation (CMN) - Official Website
 Moby Lines - Official Website
 "89 % des corses opposés à l'indépendance de l'île" [89% Corsicans are opposed to Corsican independence], Nouvel Observateur (in French)
 Enquête: la Corse vue par les Corses - Rue89, Le nouvel observateur
 Blackwood, Robert J. (2008). The State, the Activists and the Islanders: Language Policy on Corsica. Springer. p. 164. ISBN 140208384X.
 "France Moves to Crush Corsican Separatists". The New York Times. 15 January 1997. Retrieved 17 December 2012.
 "Corsican". UNESCO Atlas of the World's Languages in Danger. UNESCO. 27 April 2011. Retrieved 24 November 2012.
 "French Cabinet Split Over Corsican Autonomy". The New York Times. 30 August 2000. Retrieved 24 November 2012.
 "A worrying result". The Economist. The Economist Newspaper Limited. 10 July 2003. Retrieved 24 November 2012.
 "Victoire historique des nationalistes en Corse". abp.bzh.
 "Corsican nationalists win historic victory in French elections". The Guardian. December 14, 2015 – via theguardian.com.
 "Discours de Gilles Simeoni, président du conseil exécutif de Corse - France 3 Corse ViaStella". france3-regions.francetvinfo.fr.
Bibliography
Bertarelli, Luigi Vittorio (1929). Corsica. Guida d'Italia (in Italian). Rome: CTI.
Loughlin, John. 1989. "Regionalism and Ethnic Nationalism in France: A Case-study of Corsica". Thesis. San Domenico, Italy: European University Institute.
Loughlin, John, and Claude Olivesi (eds.). 1999. Autonomies insulaires: vers une politique de différence pour la Corse. Ajaccio: Editions Albiana. ISBN 2-905124-47-4
Ravis-Giordani, Georges. 1991. Le Guide de la Corse. Besançon: La Manufacture. ISBN 2-7377-0262-3
Saul, John Ralston. 1992. Voltaire's Bastards: The Dictatorship of Reason in the West. New York: Free Press; Maxwell Macmillan International. ISBN 0-02-927725-6
External links
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Corsica.
	Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Corsica.
Official website
Corsica: a mountain in the sea – Official French website (in English)
Wikisource "Corsica" . Encyclopædia Britannica. 7 (11th ed.). 1911. pp. 199–204.
Costa, L. J.; Cécile Costa (2005). "Préhistoire de la Corse" (in French). Kyrnos Publications pour l'archéologie. Retrieved 26 April 2008.
"TerraCorsa, I Muvrini and much more Corsican music". TerraCorsa. Retrieved 22 August 2011.
Dumas, Alexandre (2003) [1845]. "The Corsican Brothers". Arthur's Classical Novels. Archived from the original on 19 April 2008. Retrieved 27 April 2008.
Corsica at Curlie
"National Geographic Magazine: Corsica Map". National Geographic Society. 2003. Archived from the original on 10 December 2012. Retrieved 5 May 2008.
"Corsica rejects autonomy offer by Paris". CNN. 6 July 2003. Archived from the original on 8 April 2008. Retrieved 26 April 2008.
Keyser, Will. "Corsica from the inside!". Corsica Isula. Retrieved 26 April 2008.
jabro. "Getting around in Corsica by bicycle". jabro.net. Retrieved 28 August 2009.
Guiderdoni, jf. "A different visit of Corsica". corsica_experience. Retrieved 5 June 2011.
Ferries to Corsica Detailed technical specifications of the various ferry vessels, history, deckplans. (in Italian)
Audio recording of the traditional Corsican folktale 'Goldenhair' (in English)
3-minute video "The Workout the World Forgot," filmed in Corsica, 2008
vte
Administrative regions of France
Coordinates: 42°9′N 9°5′E

vte
Kingdom of France Historical provinces of France
vte
France topics
Authority control Edit this at Wikidata	
BNF: cb11933435z (data) GND: 4032527-1 LCCN: n81070646 MusicBrainz: 8216eb6e-3b17-4aef-9285-ff2901ef9b4f NARA: 10044545 NDL: 00628503 VIAF: 144256266 WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 144256266
Categories: CorsicaRegions of FranceMediterranean islandsSouthern EuropeTyrrhenian SeaTerritories of the Republic of GenoaIslands of Corsica
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikivoyage

Languages
Беларуская
Corsu
Deutsch
Français
Lietuvių
Polski
Русский
Suomi
Українська
129 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 16 February 2019, at 23:23 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Mediterranean Sea
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
"Mediterranean" redirects here. For other uses, see Mediterranean (disambiguation).
Mediterranean Sea
Mediterranee 02 EN.jpg
Map of the Mediterranean Sea
Coordinates	35°N 18°ECoordinates: 35°N 18°E
Type	Sea
Primary inflows	Atlantic Ocean, Sea of Marmara, Nile, Ebro, Rhône, Chelif, Po
Basin countries	
about 60
Surface area	2,500,000 km2 (970,000 sq mi)
Average depth	1,500 m (4,900 ft)
Max. depth	5,267 m (17,280 ft)
Water volume	3,750,000 km3 (900,000 cu mi)
Residence time	80–100 years[1]
Islands	3300+
Settlements	Alexandria, Algiers, Athens, Barcelona, Beirut, Carthage, Dubrovnik, Istanbul, İzmir, Rome, Split, Tangier, Tel Aviv, Tripoli, Tunis (full list)
The Mediterranean Sea is a sea connected to the Atlantic Ocean, surrounded by the Mediterranean Basin and almost completely enclosed by land: on the north by Southern Europe and Anatolia, on the south by North Africa and on the east by the Levant. Although the sea is sometimes considered a part of the Atlantic Ocean, it is usually identified as a separate body of water. Geological evidence indicates that around 5.9 million years ago, the Mediterranean was cut off from the Atlantic and was partly or completely desiccated over a period of some 600,000 years, the Messinian salinity crisis, before being refilled by the Zanclean flood about 5.3 million years ago.

It covers an approximate area of 2.5 million km2[2] (965,000 sq mi), representing 0.7 % of the global ocean surface, but its connection to the Atlantic (the Strait of Gibraltar) is only 14 km (8.7 mi) wide. The Strait of Gibraltar is a narrow strait that connects the Atlantic Ocean to the Mediterranean Sea and separates Spain in Europe from Morocco in Africa. In oceanography, it is sometimes called the Eurafrican Mediterranean Sea or the European Mediterranean Sea to distinguish it from mediterranean seas elsewhere.[3][4]

The Mediterranean Sea has an average depth of 1,500 m (4,900 ft) and the deepest recorded point is 5,267 m (17,280 ft) in the Calypso Deep in the Ionian Sea. The sea is bordered on the north by Europe, the east by Asia, and in the south by Africa. It is located between latitudes 30° and 46° N and longitudes 6° W and 36° E. Its west-east length, from the Strait of Gibraltar to the Gulf of Iskenderun, on the southwestern coast of Turkey, is approximately 4,000 km (2,500 miles). The sea's average north-south length, from Croatia's southern shore to Libya, is approximately 800 km (500 miles).

The sea was an important route for merchants and travellers of ancient times that allowed for trade and cultural exchange between emergent peoples of the region. The history of the Mediterranean region is crucial to understanding the origins and development of many modern societies.

The countries surrounding the Mediterranean in clockwise order are Spain, France, Monaco, Italy, Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Albania, Greece, Turkey, Syria, Lebanon, Israel, Egypt, Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, and Morocco; Malta and Cyprus are island countries in the sea. In addition, the Gaza Strip and the British Overseas Territories of Gibraltar and Akrotiri and Dhekelia have coastlines on the sea.


Contents
1	Names and etymology
2	History
2.1	Ancient civilizations
2.2	Middle Ages and empires
2.3	21st century and migrations
3	Geography
3.1	Extent
3.2	Coastal countries
3.3	Coastal cities
3.4	Subdivisions
3.4.1	Other seas
3.4.2	Other features
3.5	Ten largest islands by area
3.6	Climate
3.6.1	Sea temperature
4	Oceanography
4.1	General circulation
4.2	Other events affecting water circulation
5	Geology
5.1	Tectonics and paleoenvironmental analysis
5.1.1	Messinian salinity crisis
5.1.2	Desiccation and exchanges of flora and fauna
5.1.3	Shift to a "Mediterranean climate"
6	Paleoclimate
7	Biodiversity
8	Environmental issues
8.1	Natural hazards
8.2	Invasive species
8.2.1	Arrival of new tropical Atlantic species
8.3	Sea-level rise
8.4	Pollution
8.5	Shipping
8.6	Tourism
8.7	Overfishing
9	Gallery
10	See also
11	References
12	External links
Names and etymology

With its highly indented coastline and large number of islands, Greece has the longest Mediterranean coastline.
The Ancient Greeks called the Mediterranean simply ἡ θάλασσα 'the Sea' or sometimes ἡ μεγάλῆ θάλασσα 'the Great Sea', ἡ ἡμέτερα θάλασσα 'Our Sea', or ἡ θάλασσα ἡ καθ'ἡμᾶς 'the sea around us'. The Romans called it Mare Magnum 'Great Sea' or Mare Internum 'Internal Sea' and, starting with the Roman Empire, Mare Nostrum 'Our Sea'. The term Mare Mediterrāneum appears later: Solinus apparently used it in the 3rd century, but the earliest extant witness to it is in the 6th century, in Isidore of Seville.[5][6] It means 'in the middle of land, inland' in Latin, a compound of medius 'middle', terra 'land, earth' and -āneus 'having the nature of'. The Latin word is a calque of Greek μεσόγαιος 'inland', from μέσος 'in the middle' and γήϊος 'of the earth' (from γῆ 'land, earth'). The original meaning may have been 'the sea in the middle of the earth', rather than 'the sea enclosed by land'.[7][8]

The Carthaginians called it the "Syrian Sea". In ancient Syrian texts, Phoenician epics and in the Hebrew Bible, it was primarily known as the "Great Sea" (הַיָּם הַגָּדוֹל, HaYam HaGadol, Numbers 34:6,7; Joshua 1:4, 9:1, 15:47; Ezekiel 47:10,15,20) or simply as "The Sea" (1 Kings 5:9; compare 1 Macc. 14:34, 15:11); however, it has also been called the "Hinder Sea" (הַיָּם הָאַחֲרוֹן) because of its location on the west coast of Greater Syria or the Holy Land (and therefore behind a person facing the east), which is sometimes translated as "Western Sea", (Deut. 11:24; Joel 2:20). Another name was the "Sea of the Philistines" (יָם פְּלִשְׁתִּים, Exod. 23:31), from the people inhabiting a large portion of its shores near the Israelites. In Modern Hebrew, it is called HaYam HaTikhon (הַיָּם הַתִּיכוֹן) 'the Middle Sea'.[9]

In Modern Arabic, it is known as al-Baḥr [al-Abyaḍ] al-Mutawassiṭ (البحر [الأبيض] المتوسط) 'the [White] Middle Sea'. In Islamic and older Arabic literature, it was Baḥr al-Rūm(ī) (بحر الروم or بحر الرومي}) 'the Sea of the Romans' or 'the Roman Sea'. At first, that name referred to only the Eastern Mediterranean, but it was later extended to the whole Mediterranean. Other Arabic names were Baḥr al-šām(ī) (بحر الشام) 'the Sea of Syria' and Baḥr al-Maghrib (بحرالمغرب) 'the Sea of the West'.[10][6]

In Turkish, it is the Akdeniz 'the White Sea'; in Ottoman, ﺁق دكيز, which sometimes means only the Aegean Sea.[11] The origin of the name is not clear, as it is not known in earlier Greek, Byzantine or Islamic sources. It may be to contrast with the Black Sea.[10][9][12] In Persian, the name was translated as Baḥr-i Safīd, which was also used in later Ottoman Turkish. It is probably the origin of the colloquial Greek Άσπρη Θάλασσα.[10] Johann Knobloch claims that in Classical Antiquity, cultures in the Levant used colours to refer to the cardinal points: black referred to the north (explaining the name Black Sea), yellow or blue to east, red to south (i.e., the Red Sea), and white to west. This would explain both the Turkish Akdeniz (White Sea) and the Arab nomenclature described above.[13]

History
Main article: History of the Mediterranean region
Ancient civilizations

Greek (red) and Phoenician (yellow) colonies in antiquity c. the 6th century BCE

The Roman Empire at its farthest extent in AD 117
Several ancient civilizations were located around the Mediterranean shores and were greatly influenced by their proximity to the sea. It provided routes for trade, colonization, and war, as well as food (from fishing and the gathering of other seafood) for numerous communities throughout the ages.[14]

Due to the shared climate, geology, and access to the sea, cultures centered on the Mediterranean tended to have some extent of intertwined culture and history.

Two of the most notable Mediterranean civilizations in classical antiquity were the Greek city states and the Phoenicians, both of which extensively colonized the coastlines of the Mediterranean. Later, when Augustus founded the Roman Empire, the Romans referred to the Mediterranean as Mare Nostrum ("Our Sea"). For the next 400 years, the Roman Empire completely controlled the Mediterranean Sea and virtually all its coastal regions from Gibraltar to the Levant.

Darius I of Persia, who conquered Ancient Egypt, built a canal linking the Mediterranean to the Red Sea. Darius's canal was wide enough for two triremes to pass each other with oars extended, and required four days to traverse.[15]

Middle Ages and empires

The Battle of Lepanto, 1571, ended in victory for the European Holy League against the Ottoman Turks.
The Western Roman Empire collapsed around AD 476. Temporarily the east was again dominant as Roman power lived on in the Byzantine Empire formed in the 4th century from the eastern half of the Roman Empire. Another power arose in the 7th century, and with it the religion of Islam, which soon swept across from the east; at its greatest extent, the Arab Empire controlled 75% of the Mediterranean region and left a lasting footprint on its eastern and southern shores.

The Arab invasions disrupted the trade relations between Western and Eastern Europe while cutting the trade route with Oriental lands. This, however, had the indirect effect of promoting the trade across the Caspian Sea. The export of grains from Egypt was re-routed towards the Eastern world. Oriental goods like silk and spices were carried from Egypt to ports like Venice and Constantinople by sailors and Jewish merchants. The Viking raids further disrupted the trade in western Europe and brought it to a halt. However, the Norsemen developed the trade from Norway to the White Sea, while also trading in luxury goods from Spain and the Mediterranean. The Byzantines in the mid-8th century retook control of the area around the north-eastern part of the Mediterranean. Venetian ships from the 9th century armed themselves to counter the harassment by Arabs while concentrating trade of oriental goods at Venice.[16]

The Fatimids maintained trade relations with the Italian city-states like Amalfi and Genoa before the Crusades, according to the Cairo Geniza documents. A document dated 996 mentions Amalfian merchants living in Cairo. Another letter states that the Genoese had traded with Alexandria. The caliph al-Mustansir had allowed Amalfian merchants to reside in Jerusalem about 1060 in place of the Latin hospice.[17]

The Crusades led to flourishing of trade between Europe and the outremer region.[18] Genoa, Venica and Pisa created colonies in regions controlled by the Crusaders and came to control the trade with the Orient. These colonies also allowed them to trade with the Eastern world. Though the fall of the Crusader states and attempts at banning of trade relations with Muslim states by the Popes temporarily disrupted the trade with the Orient, it however continued.[19]

Europe started to revive, however, as more organized and centralized states began to form in the later Middle Ages after the Renaissance of the 12th century.


The bombardment of Algiers by the Anglo-Dutch fleet in support of an ultimatum to release European slaves, August 1816
Ottoman power based in Anatolia continued to grow, and in 1453 extinguished the Byzantine Empire with the Conquest of Constantinople. Ottomans gained control of much of the sea in the 16th century and maintained naval bases in southern France (1543–1544), Algeria and Tunisia. Barbarossa, the famous Ottoman captain is a symbol of this domination with the victory of the Battle of Preveza (1538). The Battle of Djerba (1560) marked the apex of Ottoman naval domination in the Mediterranean. As the naval prowess of the European powers increased, they confronted Ottoman expansion in the region when the Battle of Lepanto (1571) checked the power of the Ottoman Navy. This was the last naval battle to be fought primarily between galleys.

The Barbary pirates of Northwest Africa preyed on Christian shipping and coastlines in the Western Mediterranean Sea.[20] According to Robert Davis, from the 16th to 19th centuries, pirates captured 1 million to 1.25 million Europeans as slaves.[21]

The development of oceanic shipping began to affect the entire Mediterranean. Once, most trade between Western Europe and the East had passed through the region, but after the 1490s the development of a sea route to the Indian Ocean allowed the importation of Asian spices and other goods through the Atlantic ports of western Europe.[22][23][24]

The sea remained strategically important. British mastery of Gibraltar ensured their influence in Africa and Southwest Asia. Wars included Naval warfare in the Mediterranean during World War I and Mediterranean theatre of World War II.

21st century and migrations

Satellite image of the Mediterranean Sea at night
In 2013 the Maltese president described the Mediterranean sea as a "cemetery" due to the large number of migrants who drowned there after their boats capsized.[25] European Parliament president Martin Schulz said in 2014 that Europe's migration policy "turned the Mediterranean into a graveyard", referring to the number of drowned refugees in the region as a direct result of the policies.[26] An Azerbaijani official described the sea as "a burial ground ... where people die".[27]

Following the 2013 Lampedusa migrant shipwreck, the Italian government decided to strengthen the national system for the patrolling of the Mediterranean Sea by authorising "Operation Mare Nostrum", a military and humanitarian mission in order to rescue the migrants and arrest the traffickers of immigrants. In 2015, more than one million migrants crossed the Mediterranean Sea into Europe.[28]

Italy was particularly affected by the European migrant crisis. Since 2013, over 700,000 migrants have landed in Italy,[29] mainly sub-Saharan Africans.[30]

Geography

A satellite image showing the Mediterranean Sea. The Strait of Gibraltar can be seen in the bottom left (north-west) quarter of the image; to its left is the Iberian Peninsula in Europe, and to its right, the Maghreb in Africa.

The Dardanelles strait in Turkey. The north side is Europe with the Gelibolu Peninsula in the Thrace region; the south side is Anatolia in Asia.
The Mediterranean Sea is connected to the Atlantic Ocean by the Strait of Gibraltar (known in Homer's writings as the "Pillars of Hercules") in the west and to the Sea of Marmara and the Black Sea, by the Dardanelles and the Bosporus respectively, in the east. The Sea of Marmara (Dardanelles) is often considered a part of the Mediterranean Sea, whereas the Black Sea is generally not. The 163 km (101 mi) long artificial Suez Canal in the southeast connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea.[9]

Large islands in the Mediterranean include Cyprus, Crete, Euboea, Rhodes, Lesbos, Chios, Kefalonia, Corfu, Limnos, Samos, Naxos and Andros in the Eastern Mediterranean; Sicily, Cres, Krk, Brač, Hvar, Pag, Korčula and Malta in the central Mediterranean; Sardinia, Corsica, and the Balearic Islands: Ibiza, Majorca, and Menorca in the Western Mediterranean.

The typical Mediterranean climate has hot, humid, and dry summers and mild, rainy winters. Crops of the region include olives, grapes, oranges, tangerines, and cork.

Extent
The International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Mediterranean Sea as follows:[31]

Stretching from the Strait of Gibraltar in the west to the entrances to the Dardanelles and the Suez Canal in the east, the Mediterranean Sea is bounded by the coasts of Europe, Africa and Asia, and is divided into two deep basins:

Western Basin:
On the west: A line joining the extremities of Cape Trafalgar (Spain) and Cape Spartel (Africa).
On the northeast: The west coast of Italy. In the Strait of Messina a line joining the north extreme of Cape Paci (15°42'E) with Cape Peloro, the east extreme of the Island of Sicily. The north coast of Sicily.
On the east: A line joining Cape Lilibeo the western point of Sicily (37°47′N 12°22′E), through the Adventure Bank to Cape Bon (Tunisia).
Eastern Basin:
On the west: The northeastern and eastern limits of the Western Basin.
On the northeast: A line joining Kum Kale (26°11'E) and Cape Helles, the western entrance to the Dardanelles.
On the southeast: The entrance to the Suez Canal.
On the east: The coasts of Syria and Israel.
Coastal countries
For a more comprehensive list, see List of Mediterranean countries.

Map of the Mediterranean Sea
The following countries have a coastline on the Mediterranean Sea:

Northern shore (from west to east): Spain, France, Monaco, Italy, Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Albania, Greece, Turkey.
Eastern shore (from north to south): Turkey, Syria, Lebanon, Israel, Egypt.
Southern shore (from west to east): Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya, Egypt.
Island nations: Malta, Cyprus.
Several other territories also border the Mediterranean Sea (from west to east): The British overseas territory of Gibraltar, the Spanish autonomous cities of Ceuta and Melilla and nearby islands, the Sovereign Base Areas on Cyprus, and the Palestinian Gaza Strip.


Barcelona, the third largest metropolitan area on the Mediterranean Sea (after Istanbul and Alexandria) and also the headquarters of the Union for the Mediterranean

The Acropolis of Athens with the Mediterranean Sea in the background

The ancient port of Jaffa (now part of Tel Aviv-Yafo) in Israel: according to the Bible, where Jonah set sail before being swallowed by a whale[32]

Alexandria, the second largest city on the Mediterranean after Istanbul, Turkey

Catania, Sicily, with Mount Etna in the background

İzmir, the third metropolis of Turkey after Istanbul and Ankara
Coastal cities
For a more comprehensive list, see List of coastal settlements of the Mediterranean Sea.
Major cities (municipalities) with populations larger than 200,000 people bordering the Mediterranean Sea are:

Country	Cities
Algeria	Algiers, Annaba, Oran
Egypt	Alexandria, Damietta, Port Said
France	Marseille, Nice
Greece	Athens, Piraeus, Patras, Thessaloniki
Israel	Ashdod, Haifa, Netanya, Rishon LeZion, Tel Aviv
Italy	Bari, Catania, Genoa, Messina, Naples, Palermo, Rome, Taranto, Trieste, Venice
Lebanon	Beirut, Tripoli
Libya	Benghazi, Khoms, Misrata, Tripoli, Zawiya, Zliten
Morocco	Tétouan, Tangier
Palestine	Gaza City, Khan Yunis
Spain	Alicante, Badalona, Barcelona, Cartagena, Málaga, Palma, Valencia.
Syria	Latakia
Tunisia	Sfax, Sousse, Tunis
Turkey	Adana, Antalya, Istanbul (through the Sea of Marmara), İzmir, Mersin
Subdivisions

Africa (left, on horizon) and Europe (right), as seen from Gibraltar
The International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) divides the Mediterranean into a number of smaller waterbodies, each with their own designation (from west to east):[31]

the Strait of Gibraltar;
the Alboran Sea, between Spain and Morocco;
the Balearic Sea, between mainland Spain and its Balearic Islands;
the Ligurian Sea between Corsica and Liguria (Italy);
the Tyrrhenian Sea enclosed by Sardinia, Italian peninsula and Sicily;
the Ionian Sea between Italy, Albania and Greece;
the Adriatic Sea between Italy, Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and Albania;
the Aegean Sea between Greece and Turkey.
Other seas

Positano, Tyrrhenian Sea
Some other seas whose names have been in common use from the ancient times, or in the present:

the Sea of Sardinia, between Sardinia and Balearic Islands, as a part of the Balearic Sea
the Sea of Sicily between Sicily and Tunisia,
the Libyan Sea between Libya and Crete,
In the Aegean Sea,
the Thracian Sea in its north,
the Myrtoan Sea between the Cyclades and the Peloponnese,
the Sea of Crete north of Crete,
the Icarian Sea between Kos and Chios
the Cilician Sea between Turkey and Cyprus
the Levantine Sea at the eastern end of the Mediterranean
Many of these smaller seas feature in local myth and folklore and derive their names from these associations.

Other features

View of the Saint George Bay, and snow-capped Mount Sannine from the Corniche, Beirut

The Port of Marseille seen from L'Estaque

Sarandë, Albania is situated on an open sea gulf of the Ionian sea in the central Mediterranean.
In addition to the seas, a number of gulfs and straits are recognised:

the Saint George Bay in Beirut, Lebanon
the Ras Ibn Hani cape in Latakia, Syria
the Ras al-Bassit cape in northern Syria.
the Minet el-Beida ("White Harbour") bay near ancient Ugarit, Syria
the Strait of Gibraltar, connects the Atlantic Ocean to the Mediterranean Sea and separates Spain from Morocco
the Bay of Gibraltar, at the southern end of the Iberian Peninsula
the Gulf of Corinth, an enclosed sea between the Ionian Sea and the Corinth Canal
the Pagasetic Gulf, the gulf of Volos, south of the Thermaic Gulf, formed by the Mount Pelion peninsula
the Saronic Gulf, the gulf of Athens, between the Corinth Canal and the Mirtoan Sea
the Thermaic Gulf, the gulf of Thessaloniki, located in the northern Greek region of Macedonia
the Kvarner Gulf, Croatia
the Gulf of Lion, south of France
the Gulf of Valencia, east of Spain
the Strait of Messina, between Sicily and Calabrian peninsula
the Gulf of Genoa, northwestern Italy
the Gulf of Venice, northeastern Italy
the Gulf of Trieste, northeastern Italy
the Gulf of Taranto, southern Italy

The Paklinski Islands off the coast of Croatia; the Adriatic Sea contains over 1200 islands and islets
the Gulf of Salerno, southwestern Italy
the Gulf of Gaeta, southwestern Italy
the Gulf of Squillace, southern Italy
the Strait of Otranto, between Italy and Albania
the Gulf of Haifa, northern Israel
the Gulf of Sidra, between Tripolitania (western Libya) and Cyrenaica (eastern Libya)
the Strait of Sicily, between Sicily and Tunisia
the Corsica Channel, between Corsica and Italy
the Strait of Bonifacio, between Sardinia and Corsica
the Gulf of İskenderun, between İskenderun and Adana (Turkey)
the Gulf of Antalya, between west and east shores of Antalya (Turkey)
the Bay of Kotor, in south-western Montenegro and south-eastern Croatia
the Malta Channel, between Sicily and Malta
the Gozo Channel, between Malta Island and Gozo
Ten largest islands by area

The two biggest islands of the Mediterranean: Sicily and Sardinia (Italy)
Main article: List of islands in the Mediterranean
Country	Island	Area in km2	Population
Italy	Sicily	25,460	5,048,995
Italy	Sardinia	23,821	1,672,804
Cyprus	Cyprus	9,251	1,088,503
France	Corsica	8,680	299,209
Greece	Crete	8,336	623,666
Greece	Euboea	3,655	218.000
Spain	Majorca	3,640	869,067
Greece	Lesbos	1,632	90,643
Greece	Rhodes	1,400	117,007
Greece	Chios	842	51,936
Climate

Map of climate zones in the areas surrounding the Mediterranean Sea, according to the Köppen climate classification
Sea temperature
Mean sea temperature (°C)
Jan	Feb	Mar	Apr	May	Jun	Jul	Aug	Sep	Oct	Nov	Dec	Year
Marseille[33]	13	13	13	14	16	18	21	22	21	18	16	14	16.6
Gibraltar[34]	16	15	16	16	17	20	22	22	22	20	18	17	18.4
Málaga[35]	16	15	15	16	17	20	22	23	22	20	18	16	18.3
Athens[36]	16	15	15	16	18	21	24	24	24	21	19	18	19.3
Barcelona[37]	13	13	13	14	17	20	23	25	23	20	17	15	17.8
Heraklion[38]	16	15	15	16	19	22	24	25	24	22	20	18	19.7
Venice[39]	11	10	11	13	18	22	25	26	23	20	16	14	17.4
Valencia[40]	14	13	14	15	17	21	24	26	24	21	18	15	18.5
Malta[41]	16	16	15	16	18	21	24	26	25	23	21	18	19.9
Alexandria[42]	18	17	17	18	20	23	25	26	26	25	22	20	21.4
Naples[43]	15	14	14	15	18	22	25	27	25	22	19	16	19.3
Larnaca[44]	18	17	17	18	20	24	26	27	27	25	22	19	21.7
Limassol[45]	18	17	17	18	20	24	26	27	27	25	22	19	21.7
Antalya	17	17	17	18	21	24	27	28	27	25	22	19	21.8
Tel Aviv[46]	18	17	17	18	21	24	26	28	27	26	23	20	22.1
Oceanography

Predominant surface currents for June
Being nearly landlocked affects conditions in the Mediterranean Sea: for instance, tides are very limited as a result of the narrow connection with the Atlantic Ocean. The Mediterranean is characterised and immediately recognised by its deep blue colour.

Evaporation greatly exceeds precipitation and river runoff in the Mediterranean, a fact that is central to the water circulation within the basin.[47] Evaporation is especially high in its eastern half, causing the water level to decrease and salinity to increase eastward.[48] The average salinity in the basin is 38 PSU at 5 m depth.[49] The temperature of the water in the deepest part of the Mediterranean Sea is 13.2 °C (55.8 °F).[49]

General circulation
Water circulation in the Mediterranean can be described from the surface waters entering from the Atlantic through the Strait of Gibraltar. These cool and relatively low-salinity waters circulate westwards along the North African coasts. A part of these surface waters does not pass the Sicily Strait, deviates towards Corsica before exiting the Mediterranean. The surface waters entering the eastern Mediterranean basin circulate along the Lybian and Israelian coasts. Upon reaching the Levantine Sea, the surface waters have experienced warming and saltening from their initial Atlantic state, they have now a more important density and dive to form the Levantine Intermediate Waters (LIW). Most of the water found anywhere between 50 and 600 m deep in the Mediterranean originates from the LIW.[50] LIW are formed along the coasts of Turkey and circulate eastwards along the Greek and South Italian coasts. LIW are the only waters passing the Sicily Strait eastwards. After the Sicily Strait, the intermediate waters circulate along the Italian, French and Spanish coasts before exiting the Mediterranean through the depths of the Strait of Gibraltar. Deep water in the Mediterranean is formed in three main areas: the Adriatic Sea, from which originates most of the deep water in the eastern Mediterranean, the Aegean Sea, and the Gulf of Lion. Deep water formation in the Mediterranean is triggered by strong winter convection fueled by intense cold winds like the Bora. When new deep water is formed, the older waters mix with the overlaying intermediate waters and eventually exit the Mediterranean. The residence time of water in the Mediterranean is approximately 100 years, making the Mediterranean especially sensitive to climate change.[51]

Other events affecting water circulation
Being a semi-enclosed basin, the Mediterranean experiences transitory events that can affect the water circulation on short time scales. In the Mid 1990s, the Aegean Sea became the main area for deep water formation in the eastern Mediterranean after particularly cold winter conditions. This transitory switch in the origin of deep waters in the eastern Mediterranean was termed Eastern Mediterranean Transient (EMT) and had major consequences on water circulation of the Mediterranean.[52][53][54]

Another example of transient event affecting the Mediterranean circulation is the periodic inversion of the North Ionian Gyre, which is a anticyclonic ocean gyre observed in the northen part of the Ionian Sea, off the Greek coast. The transition from anticylonic to cyclonic rotation of this gyre changes the origin of the waters fueling it. When the circulation is anticyclonic (most common), the waters of the gyre originate from the Adriatic Sea. When the circulation is cyclonic, the waters originate from the Levantine Sea. These waters having different physical and chemical characteristics, the periodic inversion of the North Ionian Gyre (called Bimodal Oscillating System or BiOS) has important consequences on the Mediterranean circulation and biogeochemistry. [55]


Geology
See also: Geology and paleoclimatology of the Mediterranean Basin

A submarine karst spring, called vrulja, near Omiš; observed through several ripplings of an otherwise calm sea surface.
The geologic history of the Mediterranean Sea is complex. Underlain by oceanic crust, the sea basin was once thought to be a tectonic remnant of the ancient Tethys Ocean; it is now known to be a structurally younger basin, called the Neotethys, which was first formed by the convergence of the African and Eurasian plates during the Late Triassic and Early Jurassic. Because it is a near-landlocked body of water in a normally dry climate, the Mediterranean is subject to intensive evaporation and the precipitation of evaporites. The Messinian salinity crisis started about six million years ago (mya) when the Mediterranean became landlocked, and then essentially dried up. There are salt deposits accumulated on the bottom of the basin of more than a million cubic kilometres—in some places more than three kilometres thick.[56][57]

Scientists estimate that the sea was last filled about 5.3 million years ago (mya) in less than two years by the Zanclean flood. Water poured in from the Atlantic Ocean through a newly breached gateway now called the Strait of Gibraltar at an estimated rate of about three orders of magnitude (one thousand times) larger than the current flow of the Amazon River.[58]

The Mediterranean Sea has an average depth of 1,500 m (4,900 ft) and the deepest recorded point is 5,267 m (17,280 ft) in the Calypso Deep in the Ionian Sea. The coastline extends for 46,000 km (29,000 mi). A shallow submarine ridge (the Strait of Sicily) between the island of Sicily and the coast of Tunisia divides the sea in two main subregions: the Western Mediterranean, with an area of about 850 thousand km2 (330 thousand mi2); and the Eastern Mediterranean, of about 1.65 million km2 (640 thousand mi2). A characteristic of the coastal Mediterranean are submarine karst springs or vruljas, which discharge pressurised groundwater into the coastal seawater from below the surface; the discharge water is usually fresh, and sometimes may be thermal.[59][60]

Tectonics and paleoenvironmental analysis

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The Mediterranean basin and sea system was established by the ancient African-Arabian continent colliding with the Eurasian continent. As Africa-Arabia drifted northward, it closed over the ancient Tethys Ocean which had earlier separated the two supercontinents Laurasia and Gondwana. At about that time in the middle Jurassic period (roughly 170 million years ago[dubious – discuss]) a much smaller sea basin, dubbed the Neotethys, was formed shortly before the Tethys Ocean closed at its western (Arabian) end. The broad line of collisions pushed up a very long system of mountains from the Pyrenees in Spain to the Zagros Mountains in Iran in an episode of mountain-building tectonics known as the Alpine orogeny. The Neotethys grew larger during the episodes of collisions (and associated foldings and subductions) that occurred during the Oligocene and Miocene epochs (34 to 5.33 mya); see animation: Africa-Arabia colliding with Eurasia. Accordingly, the Mediterranean basin consists of several stretched tectonic plates in subduction which are the foundation of the Eastern part of the Mediterranean Sea. Various zones of subduction harbour and form the deepest and most majestic oceanic ridges, east of the Ionian Sea and south of the Aegean. The Central Indian Ridge runs East of the Mediterranean Sea South-East across the in-between of Africa and the Arabian Peninsula into the Indian Ocean.

Messinian salinity crisis

Messinian salinity crisis before the Zanclean flood
File:Crisis salina del Messiniense.ogv
Animation: Messinian salinity crisis
During Mesozoic and Cenozoic times, as the northwest corner of Africa converged on Iberia, it lifted the Betic-Rif mountain belts across southern Iberia and northwest Africa. There the development of the intramontane Betic and Rif basins led to creating two roughly-parallel marine gateways between the Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea. Dubbed the Betic and Rifian corridors, they progressively closed during middle and late Miocene times; perhaps several times.[61] During late Miocene times the closure of the Betic Corridor triggered the so-called "Messinian salinity crisis" (MSC), when the Mediterranean almost entirely dried out. The time of beginning of the MSC was recently estimated astronomically at 5.96 mya, and it persisted for some 630,000 years until about 5.3 mya;[62] see Animation: Messinian salinity crisis, at right.

After the initial drawdown and re-flooding there followed more episodes—the total number is debated—of sea drawdowns and re-floodings for the duration of the MSC. It ended when the Atlantic Ocean last re-flooded the basin—creating the Strait of Gibraltar and causing the Zanclean flood—at the end of the Miocene (5.33 mya). Some research has suggested that a desiccation-flooding-desiccation cycle may have repeated several times, which could explain several events of large amounts of salt deposition.[63][64] Recent studies, however, show that repeated desiccation and re-flooding is unlikely from a geodynamic point of view.[65][66]

Desiccation and exchanges of flora and fauna
The present-day Atlantic gateway, i.e. the Strait of Gibraltar, originated in the early Pliocene via the Zanclean Flood. As mentioned, two other gateways preceded Gibraltar: the Betic Corridor across southern Spain and the Rifian Corridor across northern Morocco. The former gateway closed about six (6) mya, causing the Messinian salinity crisis (MSC); the latter or possibly both gateways closed during the earlier Tortonian times, causing a "Tortonian salinity crisis" (from 11.6 to 7.2 mya), which occurred well before the MSC and lasted much longer. Both "crises" resulted in broad connections of the mainlands of Africa and Europe, which thereby normalised migrations of flora and fauna—especially large mammals including primates—between the two continents. The Vallesian crisis indicates a typical extinction and replacement of mammal species in Europe during Tortonian times following climatic upheaval and overland migrations of new species;[67] see Animation: Messinian salinity crisis (and mammal migrations), at right.

The near-completely enclosed configuration of the Mediterranean basin has enabled the oceanic gateways to dominate seawater circulation and the environmental evolution of the sea and basin. Circulation patterns are also affected by several other factors—including climate, bathymetry, and water chemistry and temperature—which are interactive and can induce precipitation of evaporites. Deposits of evaporites accumulated earlier in the nearby Carpathian foredeep during the Middle Miocene, and the adjacent Red Sea Basin (during the Late Miocene), and in the whole Mediterranean basin (during the MSC and the Messinian age). Diatomites are regularly found underneath the evaporite deposits, suggesting a connection between their geneses.

Today, evaporation of surface seawater (output) is more than the supply (input) of fresh water by precipitation and coastal drainage systems, causing the salinity of the Mediterranean to be much higher than that of the Atlantic—so much so that the saltier Mediterranean waters sink below the waters incoming from the Atlantic, causing a two-layer flow across the Gibraltar strait: that is, an outflow submarine current of warm saline Mediterranean water, counterbalanced by an inflow surface current of less saline cold oceanic water from the Atlantic. Herman Sörgel's Atlantropa project proposal in the 1920s proposed a hydroelectric dam to be built across the Strait of Gibraltar, using the inflow current to provide a large amount of hydroelectric energy. The underlying energy grid was as well intended to support a political union between Europe and, at least, the Marghreb part of Africa (compare Eurafrika for the later impact and Desertec for a later project with some parallels in the planned grid).[68]

Shift to a "Mediterranean climate"
The end of the Miocene also marked a change in the climate of the Mediterranean basin. Fossil evidence from that period reveals that the larger basin had a humid subtropical climate with rainfall in the summer supporting laurel forests. The shift to a "Mediterranean climate" occurred largely within the last three million years (the late Pliocene epoch) as summer rainfall decreased. The subtropical laurel forests retreated; and even as they persisted on the islands of Macaronesia off the Atlantic coast of Iberia and North Africa, the present Mediterranean vegetation evolved, dominated by coniferous trees and sclerophyllous trees and shrubs with small, hard, waxy leaves that prevent moisture loss in the dry summers. Much of these forests and shrublands have been altered beyond recognition by thousands of years of human habitation. There are now very few relatively intact natural areas in what was once a heavily wooded region.

Paleoclimate
Because of its latitudinal position and its land-locked configuration, the Mediterranean is especially sensitive to astronomically induced climatic variations, which are well documented in its sedimentary record. Since the Mediterranean is involved in the deposition of eolian dust from the Sahara during dry periods, whereas riverine detrital input prevails during wet ones, the Mediterranean marine sapropel-bearing sequences provide high-resolution climatic information. These data have been employed in reconstructing astronomically calibrated time scales for the last 9 Ma of the Earth's history, helping to constrain the time of past geomagnetic reversals.[69] Furthermore, the exceptional accuracy of these paleoclimatic records has improved our knowledge of the Earth's orbital variations in the past.

Biodiversity
Unlike the vast multidirectional Ocean currents in open Oceans within their respective Oceanic zones; biodiversity in the Mediterranean Sea is that of a stable one due to the subtle but strong locked nature of currents which affects favorably, even the smallest macroscopic type of Volcanic Life Form. The stable Marine ecosystem of the Mediterranean Sea and sea temperature provides a nourishing environment for life in the deep sea to flourish while assuring a balanced Aquatic ecosystem excluded from any external deep oceanic factors.

As a result of the drying of the sea during the Messinian salinity crisis,[70] the marine biota of the Mediterranean are derived primarily from the Atlantic Ocean. The North Atlantic is considerably colder and more nutrient-rich than the Mediterranean, and the marine life of the Mediterranean has had to adapt to its differing conditions in the five million years since the basin was reflooded.

The Alboran Sea is a transition zone between the two seas, containing a mix of Mediterranean and Atlantic species. The Alboran Sea has the largest population of bottlenose dolphins in the Western Mediterranean, is home to the last population of harbour porpoises in the Mediterranean, and is the most important feeding grounds for loggerhead sea turtles in Europe. The Alboran sea also hosts important commercial fisheries, including sardines and swordfish. The Mediterranean monk seals live in the Aegean Sea in Greece. In 2003, the World Wildlife Fund raised concerns about the widespread drift net fishing endangering populations of dolphins, turtles, and other marine animals such as the ogre cancer.

There was a resident population of killer whale in the Mediterranean until the 1980s, when they went extinct, probably due to longterm PCB exposure. There are still annual sightings of killer whale vagrants. [71]

See also: Specially Protected Areas of Mediterranean Importance, List of fish of the Mediterranean Sea, and List of fish of the Black Sea
Environmental issues
System-search.svg
This section's factual accuracy is disputed. Relevant discussion may be found on Talk:Mediterranean Sea/Archive 1. Please help to ensure that disputed statements are reliably sourced. (February 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
For 4,000 years, human activity has transformed most parts of Mediterranean Europe, and the "humanisation of the landscape" overlapped with the appearance of the present Mediterranean climate.[72] The image of a simplistic, environmental determinist notion of a Mediterranean Paradise on Earth in antiquity, which was destroyed by later civilisations dates back to at least the 18th century and was for centuries fashionable in archaeological and historical circles. Based on a broad variety of methods, e.g. historical documents, analysis of trade relations, floodplain sediments, pollen, tree-ring and further archaeometric analyses and population studies, Alfred Thomas Grove and Oliver Rackham's work on "The Nature of Mediterranean Europe" challenges this common wisdom of a Mediterranean Europe as a "Lost Eden", a formerly fertile and forested region, that had been progressively degraded and desertified by human mismanagement.[72] The belief stems more from the failure of the recent landscape to measure up to the imaginary past of the classics as idealised by artists, poets and scientists of the early modern Enlightenment.[72]

The historical evolution of climate, vegetation and landscape in southern Europe from prehistoric times to the present is much more complex and underwent various changes. For example, some of the deforestation had already taken place before the Roman age. While in the Roman age large enterprises as the Latifundiums took effective care of forests and agriculture, the largest depopulation effects came with the end of the empire. Some[who?] assume that the major deforestation took place in modern times—the later usage patterns were also quite different e.g. in southern and northern Italy. Also, the climate has usually been unstable and showing various ancient and modern "Little Ice Ages",[73] and plant cover accommodated to various extremes and became resilient with regard to various patterns of human activity.[72]

Humanisation was therefore not the cause of climate change but followed it.[72] The wide ecological diversity typical of Mediterranean Europe is predominantly based on human behavior, as it is and has been closely related human usage patterns.[72] The diversity range was enhanced by the widespread exchange and interaction of the longstanding and highly diverse local agriculture, intense transport and trade relations, and the interaction with settlements, pasture and other land use. The greatest human-induced changes, however, came after World War II, respectively in line with the '1950s-syndrome'[74] as rural populations throughout the region abandoned traditional subsistence economies. Grove and Rackham suggest that the locals left the traditional agricultural patterns towards taking a role as scenery-setting agents for the then much more important (tourism) travellers. This resulted in more monotonous, large-scale formations.[72] Among further current important threats to Mediterranean landscapes are overdevelopment of coastal areas, abandonment of mountains and, as mentioned, the loss of variety via the reduction of traditional agricultural occupations.[72]

Natural hazards

Stromboli volcano in Italy
The region has a variety of geological hazards which have closely interacted with human activity and land use patterns. Among others, in the eastern Mediterranean, the Thera eruption, dated to the 17th or 16th century BC, caused a large tsunami that some experts hypothesise devastated the Minoan civilisation on the nearby island of Crete, further leading some to believe that this may have been the catastrophe that inspired the Atlantis legend.[75] Mount Vesuvius is the only active volcano on the European mainland, while others as Mount Etna and Stromboli are to be found on neighbouring islands. The region around Vesuvius including the Phlegraean Fields Caldera west of Naples are quite active[76] and constitute the most densely populated volcanic region in the world where an eruptive event may occur within decades.[77]

Vesuvius itself is regarded as quite dangerous due to a tendency towards explosive (Plinian) eruptions.[78] It is best known for its eruption in AD 79 that led to the burying and destruction of the Roman cities of Pompeii and Herculaneum.

The large experience of member states and regional authorities has led to exchange on the international level with cooperation of NGOs, states, regional and municipality authorities and private persons.[79] The Greek–Turkish earthquake diplomacy is a quite positive example of natural hazards leading to improved relations of traditional rivals in the region after earthquakes in İzmir and Athens 1999. The European Union Solidarity Fund (EUSF) was set up to respond to major natural disasters and express European solidarity to disaster-stricken regions within all of Europe.[80] The largest amount of fund requests in the EU is being directed to forest fires, followed by floodings and earthquakes. Forest fires are, whether man made or natural, an often recurring and dangerous hazard in the Mediterranean region.[79] Also, tsunamis are an often underestimated hazard in the region. For example, the 1908 Messina earthquake and tsunami took more than 123,000 lives in Sicily and Calabria and is among the most deadly natural disasters in modern Europe.

Invasive species

The reticulate whipray is one of the species that colonised the Eastern Mediterranean through the Suez Canal as part of the ongoing Lessepsian migration.
The opening of the Suez Canal in 1869 created the first salt-water passage between the Mediterranean and Red Sea. The Red Sea is higher than the Eastern Mediterranean, so the canal serves as a tidal strait that pours Red Sea water into the Mediterranean. The Bitter Lakes, which are hyper-saline natural lakes that form part of the canal, blocked the migration of Red Sea species into the Mediterranean for many decades, but as the salinity of the lakes gradually equalised with that of the Red Sea, the barrier to migration was removed, and plants and animals from the Red Sea have begun to colonise the Eastern Mediterranean. The Red Sea is generally saltier and more nutrient-poor than the Atlantic, so the Red Sea species have advantages over Atlantic species in the salty and nutrient-poor Eastern Mediterranean. Accordingly, Red Sea species invade the Mediterranean biota, and not vice versa; this phenomenon is known as the Lessepsian migration (after Ferdinand de Lesseps, the French engineer) or Erythrean invasion. The construction of the Aswan High Dam across the Nile River in the 1960s reduced the inflow of freshwater and nutrient-rich silt from the Nile into the Eastern Mediterranean, making conditions there even more like the Red Sea and worsening the impact of the invasive species.

Invasive species have become a major component of the Mediterranean ecosystem and have serious impacts on the Mediterranean ecology, endangering many local and endemic Mediterranean species. A first look at some groups of exotic species show that more than 70% of the non-indigenous decapods and about 63% of the exotic fishes occurring in the Mediterranean are of Indo Pacific origin,[81] introduced into the Mediterranean through the Suez Canal. This makes the Canal as the first pathway of arrival of "alien" species into the Mediterranean. The impacts of some lessepsian species have proven to be considerable mainly in the Levantine basin of the Mediterranean, where they are replacing native species and becoming a "familiar sight".

According to the International Union for Conservation of Nature definition, as well as Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and Ramsar Convention terminologies, they are alien species, as they are non-native (non-indigenous) to the Mediterranean Sea, and they are outside their normal area of distribution which is the Indo-Pacific region. When these species succeed in establishing populations in the Mediterranean Sea, compete with and begin to replace native species they are "Alien Invasive Species", as they are an agent of change and a threat to the native biodiversity. In the context of CBD, "introduction" refers to the movement by human agency, indirect or direct, of an alien species outside of its natural range (past or present). The Suez Canal, being an artificial (man made) canal, is a human agency. Lessepsian migrants are therefore "introduced" species (indirect, and unintentional). Whatever wording is chosen, they represent a threat to the native Mediterranean biodiversity, because they are non-indigenous to this sea. In recent years, the Egyptian government's announcement of its intentions to deepen and widen the canal have raised concerns from marine biologists, fearing that such an act will only worsen the invasion of Red Sea species into the Mediterranean, facilitating the crossing of the canal for yet additional species.[82]

Arrival of new tropical Atlantic species
In recent decades, the arrival of exotic species from the tropical Atlantic has become a noticeable feature. Whether this reflects an expansion of the natural area of these species that now enter the Mediterranean through the Gibraltar strait, because of a warming trend of the water caused by global warming; or an extension of the maritime traffic; or is simply the result of a more intense scientific investigation, is still an open question. While not as intense as the "lessepsian" movement, the process may be scientific interest and may therefore warrant increased levels of monitoring.[citation needed]

Sea-level rise
By 2100 the overall level of the Mediterranean could rise between 3 to 61 cm (1.2 to 24.0 in) as a result of the effects of climate change.[83] This could have adverse effects on populations across the Mediterranean:

Rising sea levels will submerge parts of Malta. Rising sea levels will also mean rising salt water levels in Malta's groundwater supply and reduce the availability of drinking water.[84]
A 30 cm (12 in) rise in sea level would flood 200 square kilometres (77 sq mi) of the Nile Delta, displacing over 500,000 Egyptians.[85]
Coastal ecosystems also appear to be threatened by sea level rise, especially enclosed seas such as the Baltic, the Mediterranean and the Black Sea. These seas have only small and primarily east-west movement corridors, which may restrict northward displacement of organisms in these areas.[86] Sea level rise for the next century (2100) could be between 30 cm (12 in) and 100 cm (39 in) and temperature shifts of a mere 0.05–0.1 °C in the deep sea are sufficient to induce significant changes in species richness and functional diversity.[87]

Pollution
Pollution in this region has been extremely high in recent years.[when?] The United Nations Environment Programme has estimated that 650,000,000 t (720,000,000 short tons) of sewage, 129,000 t (142,000 short tons) of mineral oil, 60,000 t (66,000 short tons) of mercury, 3,800 t (4,200 short tons) of lead and 36,000 t (40,000 short tons) of phosphates are dumped into the Mediterranean each year.[88] The Barcelona Convention aims to 'reduce pollution in the Mediterranean Sea and protect and improve the marine environment in the area, thereby contributing to its sustainable development.'[89] Many marine species have been almost wiped out because of the sea's pollution. One of them is the Mediterranean monk seal which is considered to be among the world's most endangered marine mammals.[90]

The Mediterranean is also plagued by marine debris. A 1994 study of the seabed using trawl nets around the coasts of Spain, France and Italy reported a particularly high mean concentration of debris; an average of 1,935 items per km2. Plastic debris accounted for 76%, of which 94% was plastic bags.[91]

Shipping

A cargo ship cruises towards the Strait of Messina
Some of the world's busiest shipping routes are in the Mediterranean Sea. It is estimated that approximately 220,000 merchant vessels of more than 100 tonnes cross the Mediterranean Sea each year—about one third of the world's total merchant shipping. These ships often carry hazardous cargo, which if lost would result in severe damage to the marine environment.

The discharge of chemical tank washings and oily wastes also represent a significant source of marine pollution. The Mediterranean Sea constitutes 0.7% of the global water surface and yet receives 17% of global marine oil pollution. It is estimated that every year between 100,000 t (98,000 long tons) and 150,000 t (150,000 long tons) of crude oil are deliberately released into the sea from shipping activities.

Approximately 370,000,000 t (360,000,000 long tons) of oil are transported annually in the Mediterranean Sea (more than 20% of the world total), with around 250–300 oil tankers crossing the sea every day. Accidental oil spills happen frequently with an average of 10 spills per year. A major oil spill could occur at any time in any part of the Mediterranean.[87]

Tourism

Antalya on the Turkish Riviera (Turquoise Coast) received more than 11 million international tourist arrivals in 2014.
The Mediterranean Sea is arguably among the most culturally diverse block basin sea regions in the world, with a unique combination of pleasant climate, beautiful coastline, rich history and various cultures. The Mediterranean region is the most popular tourist destination in the world—attracting approximately one third of the world's international tourists.[citation needed]

Tourism is one of the most important sources of income for many Mediterranean countries regardless of the man-made geopolitical conflicts that harbour coastal nations. In that regard, authorities around the Mediterranean have made it a point to extinguish rising man-made chaotic zones that would affect the economies, societies in neighboring coastal countries, let alone shipping routes. Naval and rescue components in the Mediterranean Sea are considered one of the very best due to the quick intercooperation of various Naval Fleets within proximity of each other. Unlike the vast open Oceans, the closed nature of the Mediterranean Sea provides a much more adaptable naval initiative among the coastal countries to provide effective naval and rescue missions, considered the safest and regardless of any man-made or natural disaster.

Tourism also supports small communities in coastal areas and islands by providing alternative sources of income far from urban centers. However, tourism has also played major role in the degradation of the coastal and marine environment. Rapid development has been encouraged by Mediterranean governments to support the large numbers of tourists visiting the region each year. But this has caused serious disturbance to marine habitats such as erosion and pollution in many places along the Mediterranean coasts.

Tourism often concentrates in areas of high natural wealth, causing a serious threat to the habitats of endangered Mediterranean species such as sea turtles and monk seals. Reductions in natural wealth may reduce incentives for tourists to visit.[87]

See also: environmental impact of tourism
Overfishing
Main article: overfishing
Fish stock levels in the Mediterranean Sea are alarmingly low. The European Environment Agency says that more than 65% of all fish stocks in the region are outside safe biological limits and the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation, that some of the most important fisheries—such as albacore and bluefin tuna, hake, marlin, swordfish, red mullet and sea bream—are threatened.[date missing]

There are clear indications that catch size and quality have declined, often dramatically, and in many areas larger and longer-lived species have disappeared entirely from commercial catches.

Large open water fish like tuna have been a shared fisheries resource for thousands of years but the stocks are now dangerously low. In 1999, Greenpeace published a report revealing that the amount of bluefin tuna in the Mediterranean had decreased by over 80% in the previous 20 years and government scientists warn that without immediate action the stock will collapse.

Gallery

Beach of Hammamet, Tunisia

 

The beach of la Courtade in the Îles d'Hyères, France

 

Sardinia's south coast, Italy

 
Pretty Bay, Malta

 

Panoramic view of Piran, Slovenia

 

Panoramic view of Cavtat, Croatia

 

View of Neum, Bosnia and Herzegovina

 
A view of Sveti Stefan, Montenegro

 

Ksamil Islands, Albania

 

Navagio, Greece

 

Marmaris, Turquoise Coast, Turkey

 
Paphos, Cyprus

 

Burj Islam Beach, Latakia, Syria

 

A view of Raouché off the coast of Beirut, Lebanon

 

A view of Haifa, Israel

 
Coast of Alexandria, view From Bibliotheca Alexandrina, Egypt

 

Old city of Ibiza Town, Spain

 

Les Aiguades near Béjaïa, Algeria

 

El Jebha, a port town in Morocco

 
Europa Point, Gibraltar

 

Panoramic view of La Condamine, Monaco

 

Sunset at the Deir al-Balah beach, Gaza Strip

See also
Babelmed, the site of the Mediterranean cultures
Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly
Familial Mediterranean fever
History of the Mediterranean region
Holy League (1571)
List of islands in the Mediterranean
List of Mediterranean countries
Mediterranean Basin
Mediterranean climate
Mediterranean diet
Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub
Mediterranean Games
Mediterranean race
Mediterranean sea (oceanography) – A mostly enclosed sea with limited exchange with outer oceans
Piri Reis – Early cartographer of the Mediterranean
Seto Inland Sea – A marginal sea between Honshū, Shikoku, and Kyūshū – also known as the Japanese Mediterranean Sea
Suez Canal – canal in Egypt between the Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea
Tyrrhenian Basin
Union for the Mediterranean
References
 Pinet, Paul R. (2008). Invitation to Oceanography. Paleoceanography. 30. Jones & Barlett Learning. p. 220. ISBN 978-0-7637-5993-3.
 "Mediterranean Sea". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 2015-10-23.
 "Microsoft Word – ext_abstr_East_sea_workshop_TLM.doc" (PDF). Retrieved 23 April 2010.
 "Researchers predict Mediterranean Sea level rise – Headlines – Research – European Commission". Europa. 19 March 2009. Retrieved 23 April 2010.
 Geoffrey Rickman, "The creation of Mare Nostrum: 300 BC – 500 AD", in David Abulafia, ed., The Mediterranean in History, ISBN 1-60606-057-0, 2011, p. 133.
 Vaso Seirinidou, "The Mediterranean" in Diana Mishkova, Balázs Trencsényi, European Regions and Boundaries: A Conceptual History, series European Conceptual History 3, ISBN 1-78533-585-5, 2017, p. 80
 "entry μεσόγαιος". Liddell & Scott. Archived from the original on 2 December 2009.
 Oxford English Dictionary, 3rd ed, 2001, s.v.
 Vella, Andrew P. (1985). "Mediterranean Malta" (PDF). Hyphen. 4 (5): 469–472. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 March 2017.
 "Baḥr al-Rūm" in Encyclopedia of Islam, 2nd ed
 Diran Kélékian, Dictionnaire Turc-Français, Constantinople, 1911
 Özhan Öztürk claims that in Old Turkish ak also means "west" and that Akdeniz hence means "West Sea" and that Karadeniz (Black Sea) means "North Sea". Özhan Öztürk. Pontus: Antik Çağ'dan Günümüze Karadeniz'in Etnik ve Siyasi Tarihi Genesis Yayınları. Ankara. 2011. pp. 5–9. Archived from the original on 15 September 2012.
 Johann Knoblock. Sprache und Religion, Vol. 1 (Carl Winter Universitätsverlag, 1979), 18; cf. Schmitt, Rüdiger (1989). "Black Sea". Black – Encyclopaedia Iranica. Encyclopaedia Iranica, Vol. IV, Fasc. 3. pp. 310–313.
 David Abulafia (2011). The Great Sea: A Human History of the Mediterranean. Oxford University Press.
 Rappoport, S. (Doctor of Philosophy, Basel). History of Egypt (undated, early 20th century), Volume 12, Part B, Chapter V: "The Waterways of Egypt", pp. 248–257 (online). London: The Grolier Society.
 Couper, Alastair (2015). The Geography of Sea Transport. pp. 33–37. ISBN 978-1-317-35150-4.
 Balard, Michel (2003). Bull, Marcus Graham; Edbury, Peter; Phillips, Jonathan, eds. The Experience of Crusading, Volume 2 – Defining the Crusader Kingdom. Cambridge University Press. pp. 23–35. ISBN 978-0-521-78151-0.
 Housley, Norman (2006). Contesting the Crusades. Blackwell Publishing. pp. 152–54. ISBN 978-1-4051-1189-8.
 Brundage, James (2004). Medieval Italy: An Encyclopedia. Routledge. p. 273. ISBN 978-1-135-94880-1.
 Robert Davis (5 December 2003). Christian Slaves, Muslim Masters: White Slavery in the Mediterranean, the Barbary Coast and Italy, 1500–1800. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-333-71966-4. Retrieved 17 January 2013.
 "British Slaves on the Barbary Coast". Bbc.co.uk. Retrieved 17 January 2013.
 C.I. Gable – Constantinople Falls to the Ottoman Turks - Boglewood Timeline – 1998 – Retrieved 3 September 2011.
 "History of the Ottoman Empire, an Islamic Nation where Jews Lived" – Sephardic Studies and Culture – Retrieved 3 September 2011.
 Robert Guisepi – The Ottomans: From Frontier Warriors To Empire Builders – 1992 – History World International – Retrieved 3 September 2011.
 "Migrant deaths prompt calls for EU action". Al Jazeera – English. 13 October 2013. Retrieved 12 December 2014.
 "Schulz: EU migrant policy 'turned Mediterranean into graveyard'". EUobserver. 24 October 2013. Retrieved 12 December 2014.
 "Novruz Mammadov: The Mediterranean become a burial ground".
 "Over one million sea arrivals reach Europe in 2015". UNHCR – The UN Refugee Agency. 30 December 2015.
 "What will Italy's new government mean for migrants?". The Local. 21 May 2018.
 "African migrants fear for future as Italy struggles with surge in arrivals". Reuters. 18 July 2017.
 "Limits of Oceans and Seas, 3rd edition" (PDF). International Hydrographic Organization. 1953. Retrieved 20 April 2016.
 Israel, By Sue Bryant, (New Holland Publishers, 2008), p. 72
 Weather2Travel.com. "Marseille Climate: Monthly Weather Averages – France".
 Weather2Travel.com. "Gibraltar (Westside) Climate: Monthly Weather Averages – Gibraltar".
 Weather2Travel.com. "Malaga Climate: Monthly Weather Averages – Costa del Sol".
 Weather2Travel.com. "Athens Climate: Monthly Weather Averages – Greece – Greece".
 Weather2Travel.com. "Barcelona Climate: Monthly Weather Averages – Spain".
 Weather2Travel.com. "Iraklion Climate: Monthly Weather Averages – Crete – Crete".
 Weather2Travel.com. "Venice Climate: Monthly Weather Averages – Venetian Riviera".
 Weather2Travel.com. "Valencia Climate: Monthly Weather Averages – Spain – Spain".
 Weather2Travel.com. "Valletta Climate: Monthly Weather Averages – Malta – Malta".
 Weather2Travel.com. "Alexandria Climate: Monthly Weather Averages – Egypt".
 Weather2Travel.com. "Naples Climate: Monthly Weather Averages – Neapolitan Riviera".
 Weather2Travel.com. "Larnaca Climate: Monthly Weather Averages – Cyprus".
 Weather2Travel.com. "Limassol Climate: Monthly Weather Averages – Cyprus".
 Weather2Travel.com. "Tel Aviv Climate: Monthly Weather Averages – Israel".
 Pinet, Paul R. (1996), Invitation to Oceanography (3rd ed.), St Paul, Minnesota: West Publishing Co., p. 202, ISBN 978-0-314-06339-7
 Pinet 1996, p. 206.
 Emeis, Kay-Christian; Struck, Ulrich; Schulz, Hans-Martin; Rosenberg, Reinhild; Bernasconi, Stefano; Erlenkeuser, Helmut; Sakamoto, Tatsuhiko; Martinez-Ruiz, Francisca (2000). "Temperature and salinity variations of Mediterranean Sea surface waters over the last 16,000 years from records of planktonic stable oxygen isotopes and alkenone unsaturation ratios". Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology. 158 (3–4): 259–280. Bibcode:2000PPP...158..259E. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.378.4964. doi:10.1016/s0031-0182(00)00053-5.
 Millot, Claude; Taupier-Letage, Isabelle (2005). "Circulation in the Mediterranean Sea". The Mediterranean Sea. Handbook of Environmental Chemistry. 5K. pp. 29–66. doi:10.1007/b107143. ISBN 978-3-540-25018-0.
 Millot, C. (1989). "La Circulation Générale En Méditerranée Occidentale : Aperçu De Nos Connaissances Et Projets D'études" [General Circulation in the Western Mediterranean: Overview of Our Knowledge and Study Projects]. Annales de Géographie (in French). 98 (549): 497–515. doi:10.3406/geo.1989.20925. JSTOR 23452851.
 Gasparini, G.P.; Ortona, A.; Budillon, G.; Astraldi, M.; Sansone, E. (June 2005). "The effect of the Eastern Mediterranean Transient on the hydrographic characteristics in the Strait of Sicily and in the Tyrrhenian Sea". Deep Sea Research Part I: Oceanographic Research Papers. 52 (6): 915–935. Bibcode:2005DSRI...52..915G. doi:10.1016/j.dsr.2005.01.001.
 Lascaratos, Alex; Roether, Wolfgang; Nittis, Kostas; Klein, Birgit (August 1999). "Recent changes in deep water formation and spreading in the eastern Mediterranean Sea: a review". Progress in Oceanography. 44 (1–3): 5–36. Bibcode:1999PrOce..44....5L. doi:10.1016/S0079-6611(99)00019-1.
 Theocharis, Alexander; Nittis, Kostas; Kontoyiannis, Harilaos; Papageorgiou, Emanuel; Balopoulos, Efstathios (1 June 1999). "Climatic changes in the Aegean Sea influence the eastern Mediterranean thermohaline circulation (1986-1997)". Geophysical Research Letters. 26 (11): 1617–1620. Bibcode:1999GeoRL..26.1617T. doi:10.1029/1999GL900320.
 Civitarese, G., Gacic, M., Lipizer, M., and Borzelli, G. L. E. (2010). On the impact of the Bimodal Oscillating System (BiOS) on the biogeochemistry and biology of the Adriatic and Ionian Seas (Eastern Mediterranean). Biogeosciences, 7(12) : 3987–3997. WOS :000285574100006.
 Ryan, William B. F. (2009). "Decoding the Mediterranean salinity crisis". Sedimentology. 56 (1): 95–136. Bibcode:2009Sedim..56...95R. doi:10.1111/j.1365-3091.2008.01031.x.
 William Ryan (2008). "Modeling the magnitude and timing of evaporative drawdown during the Messinian salinity crisis" (PDF). Stratigraphy. 5 (3–4): 229.
 Garcia-Castellanos, D.; Estrada, F.; Jiménez-Munt, I.; Gorini, C.; Fernàndez, M.; Vergés, J.; De Vicente, R. (2009). "Catastrophic flood of the Mediterranean after the Messinian salinity crisis". Nature. 462 (7274): 778–781. Bibcode:2009Natur.462..778G. doi:10.1038/nature08555. PMID 20010684.
 Elmer LaMoreaux, Philip (2001). "Geologic/Hydrogeologic Setting and Classification of Springs". Springs and Bottled Waters of the World: Ancient History, Source, Occurrence, Quality and Use. Springer. p. 57. ISBN 978-3-540-61841-6.
 Žumer, Jože (2004). "Odkritje podmorskih termalnih izvirov" [Discovery of submarine thermal springs] (PDF). Geografski Obzornik (in Slovenian). 51 (2): 11–17. ISSN 0016-7274. (in Slovene)
 de la Vara, Alba; Topper, Robin P.M.; Meijer, Paul Th.; Kouwenhoven, Tanja J. (2015). "Water exchange through the Betic and Rifian corridors prior to the Messinian Salinity Crisis: A model study". Paleoceanography. 30 (5): 548–557. Bibcode:2015PalOc..30..548V. doi:10.1002/2014PA002719. hdl:1874/326590.
 Krijgsman, W.; Fortuinb, A.R.; Hilgenc, F.J.; Sierrod, F.J. (2001). "Astrochronology for the Messinian Sorbas basin (SE Spain) and orbital (precessional) forcing for evaporite cyclicity". Sedimentary Geology. 140 (1): 43–60. Bibcode:2001SedG..140...43K. doi:10.1016/S0037-0738(00)00171-8. hdl:1874/1632.
 Gargani J., Rigollet C. (2007). "Mediterranean Sea level variations during the Messinian Salinity Crisis". Geophysical Research Letters. 34 (L10405): L10405. Bibcode:2007GeoRL..3410405G. doi:10.1029/2007GL029885.
 Gargani J.; Moretti I.; Letouzey J. (2008). "Evaporite accumulation during the Messinian Salinity Crisis : The Suez Rift Case". Geophysical Research Letters. 35 (2): L02401. Bibcode:2008GeoRL..35.2401G. doi:10.1029/2007gl032494.
 Govers, Rob (February 2009). "Choking the Mediterranean to dehydration: The Messinian salinity crisis". Geology. 37 (2): 167–170. Bibcode:2009Geo....37..167G. doi:10.1130/G25141A.1.
 Garcia-Castellanos, D.; Villaseñor, A. (15 December 2011). "Messinian salinity crisis regulated by competing tectonics and erosion at the Gibraltar arc". Nature. 480 (7377): 359–363. Bibcode:2011Natur.480..359G. doi:10.1038/nature10651. PMID 22170684.
 Agusti, J; Moya-Sola, S (1990). Mammal extinctions in the Vallesian (Upper Miocene). Lecture Notes in Earth Sciences. 30. pp. 425–432. doi:10.1007/BFb0011163. ISBN 978-3-540-52605-6. ISSN 1613-2580. (Abstract)
 Politische Geographien Europas: Annäherungen an ein umstrittenes Konstrukt, Anke Strüver, LIT Verlag Münster, 2005, p. 43
 FJ, Hilgen. Astronomical calibration of Gauss to Matuyama sapropels in the Mediterranean and implication for the Geomagnetic Polarity Time Scale, 104 (1991) 226–244 Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 1991."Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 July 2011. Retrieved 4 December 2009.
 Hsu K.J., "When the Mediterranean Dried Up" Scientific American, Vol. 227, December 1972, p. 32
 Carrington, Damian. "UK’s last resident killer whales 'doomed to extinction'", The Guardian, London, 14 January 2016. Retrieved 17 February 2019.
 The Nature of Mediterranean Europe: An Ecological History, by Alfred Thomas Grove, Oliver Rackham, Yale University Press, 2003, review at Yale university press Nature of Mediterranean Europe: An Ecological History (review) Brian M. Fagan, Journal of Interdisciplinary History, Volume 32, Number 3, Winter 2002, pp. 454–455 |
 Little Ice Ages: Ancient and Modern, Jean M. Grove, Taylor & Francis, 2004
 Christian Pfister (Hrsg.), Das 1950er Syndrom: Der Weg in die Konsumgesellschaft, Bern 1995
 The wave that destroyed Atlantis Harvey Lilley, BBC News Online, 2007-04-20. Retrieved 2007-04-21.
 Antonio Denti, "Super volcano", global danger, lurks near Pompeii, Reuters, 3 August 2012.
 Isaia, Roberto; Paola Marianelli; Alessandro Sbrana (2009). "Caldera unrest prior to intense volcanism in Campi Flegrei (Italy) at 4.0 ka B.P.: Implications for caldera dynamics and future eruptive scenarios". Geophysical Research Letters. 36 (L21303): L21303. Bibcode:2009GeoRL..3621303I. doi:10.1029/2009GL040513.
 McGuire, Bill (16 October 2003). "In the shadow of the volcano". guardian.co.uk. Guardian News and Media Limited. Retrieved 8 May 2010.
 "Alle kennisdossiers van het Instituut Fysieke Veiligheid" (PDF).
 EU Solidarity Fund Website 2003 proposal of EUR 47.6 million for Italian regions hit by natural disasters
 "IUCN Guidelines for the Prevention of Biodiversity Loss Caused by Alien Invasive Species" (PDF). International Union for Conservation of Nature. 2000. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 January 2009. Retrieved 11 August 2009.
 Galil, B.S. and Zenetos, A. (2002). A sea change: exotics in the eastern Mediterranean Sea, in: Leppäkoski, E. et al. (2002). Invasive aquatic species of Europe: distribution, impacts and management. pp. 325–336.
 "Mediterranean Sea Level Could Rise By Over Two Feet, Global Models Predict". Science Daily. 3 March 2009.
 "Briny future for vulnerable Malta". BBC News. 4 April 2007.
 "Egypt fertile Nile Delta falls prey to climate change". 28 January 2010. Archived from the original on 9 February 2011.
 Nicholls, R.J.; Klein, R.J.T. (2005). Climate change and coastal management on Europe's coast, in: Vermaat, J.E. et al. (Ed.) (2005). Managing European coasts: past, present and future. pp. 199–226.
 "Other threats in the Mediterranean | Greenpeace International". Greenpeace. Retrieved 23 April 2010.
 "Pollution in the Mediterranean Sea. Environmental issues". Explorecrete.com. Retrieved 23 April 2010.
 "EUROPA". Europa. Archived from the original on 9 April 2009. Retrieved 23 April 2010.
 "Mediterranean Monk Seal Fact Files: Overview". Monachus-guardian.org. 5 May 1978. Retrieved 23 April 2010.
 "Marine Litter: An Analytical Overview" (PDF). United Nations Environment Programme. 2005. Retrieved 1 August 2008.
External links
Mediterranean Sea Microorganisms: 180+ images of Foraminifera
Eastern Mediterranean Sea Long Term Ecological Research Station
vte
Countries and territories of the Mediterranean Sea
Sovereign states	
Albania Algeria Bosnia-Herzegovina Croatia Cyprus Egypt France Greece Israel Italy Lebanon Libya Malta Monaco Montenegro Morocco Slovenia Spain Syria Tunisia Turkey
States with limited recognition	
Northern Cyprus Palestine
Dependencies and other territories	
Akrotiri and Dhekelia (UK) Gibraltar (UK)
vte
Earth's oceans and seas
vte
Marginal seas of the Atlantic Ocean
Basins	
Foxe Basin
Bays	
Baffin Bay Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Hudson Bay James Bay
Channels	
English Channel
Gulfs	
Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Lion Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Saint Lawrence Gulf of Sidra Gulf of Venezuela
Seas	
Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea Greenland Sea Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Marmara Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea
vte
Earth's primary regions
vte
Regions of Africa
Central Africa	
Guinea region Gulf of Guinea Cape Lopez Mayombe Igboland Mbaise Maputaland Pool Malebo Congo Basin Chad Basin Congolese rainforests Ouaddaï highlands Ennedi Plateau
East Africa	
African Great Lakes Albertine Rift East African Rift Great Rift Valley Gregory Rift Rift Valley lakes Swahili coast Virunga Mountains Kavirondo Zanj Serengeti Horn of Africa Afar Triangle Al-Habash Barbara Danakil Alps Danakil Desert Ethiopian Highlands Gulf of Aden Gulf of Tadjoura Indian Ocean islands Comoro Islands
North Africa	
Maghreb Ifriqiya Barbary Coast Bashmur Ancient Libya Atlas Mountains Nile Valley Nile Delta Cataracts of the Nile Darfur Gulf of Aqaba Lower Egypt Lower Nubia Middle Egypt Nile Delta Nuba Mountains Nubia The Sudans Upper Egypt Western Sahara
West Africa	
Pepper Coast Gold Coast Slave Coast Ivory Coast Cape Palmas Cape Mesurado Guinea region Gulf of Guinea Niger Basin Guinean Forests of West Africa Niger Delta Inner Niger Delta Yorubaland
Southern Africa	
Madagascar Central Highlands (Madagascar) Northern Highlands Rhodesia North South Thembuland Succulent Karoo Nama Karoo Bushveld Highveld Fynbos Cape Floristic Region Kalahari Desert Okavango Delta Cape Peninsula False Bay Hydra Bay
Macro-regions	
Aethiopia Arab world Commonwealth realm East African montane forests Eastern Desert Equatorial Africa Françafrique Gibraltar Arc Greater Middle East Islands of Africa List of countries where Arabic is an official language Mediterranean Basin MENA MENASA Middle East Mittelafrika Negroland Northeast Africa Portuguese-speaking African countries Sahara Sahel Sub-Saharan Africa Sudan (region) Sudanian Savanna Tibesti Mountains Tropical Africa
vte
Regions of Asia
Central	
Greater Middle East Aral Sea Aralkum Desert Caspian Sea Dead Sea Sea of Galilee Tartary Transoxiana Turan Greater Khorasan Ariana Khwarazm Sistan Kazakhstania Kazakh Steppe Betpak-Dala Eurasian Steppe Asian Steppe Kazakh Steppe Pontic–Caspian steppe Mongolian-Manchurian grassland Wild Fields Yedisan Muravsky Trail Ural Ural Mountains Volga region Idel-Ural Kolyma Transbaikal Pryazovia Bjarmaland Kuban Zalesye Ingria Novorossiya Gornaya Shoriya Tulgas Iranian Plateau Altai Mountains Pamir Mountains Tian Shan Badakhshan Wakhan Corridor Wakhjir Pass Mount Imeon Mongolian Plateau Western Regions Taklamakan Desert Karakoram Trans-Karakoram Tract Siachen Glacier
North	
Inner Asia Northeast Ural Ural Mountains Far East Russian Far East Okhotsk-Manchurian taiga Beringia Chukchi Peninsula Kamchatka Peninsula Extreme North Tartary Siberia Baikalia (Lake Baikal) Baraba steppe Khatanga Gulf Transbaikal West Amur Basin Yenisei Gulf Yenisei Basin Sikhote-Alin
East	
Orient Japanese archipelago Northeastern Japan Arc Sakhalin Island Arc Korean Peninsula Gobi Desert Taklamakan Desert Greater Khingan Mongolian Plateau Inner Asia Inner Mongolia Outer Mongolia China proper Manchuria Outer Manchuria Inner Manchuria Northeast China Plain Mongolian-Manchurian grassland North China Plain Yan Mountains Kunlun Mountains Liaodong Peninsula Himalayas Tibetan Plateau Tibet Tarim Basin Sichuan Basin Northern Silk Road Hexi Corridor Nanzhong Lingnan Liangguang Jiangnan Jianghuai Guanzhong Huizhou Wu Jiaozhou Zhongyuan Shaannan Ordos Loop Loess Plateau Shaanbei Hamgyong Mountains Central Mountain Range Japanese Alps Suzuka Mountains Leizhou Peninsula Gulf of Tonkin Yangtze River Yangtze River Delta Yellow River Pearl River Delta Yenisei Basin Altai Mountains Wakhan Corridor Wakhjir Pass
West	
Greater Middle East MENA MENASA Middle East Red Sea Caspian Sea Mediterranean Sea Zagros Mountains Persian Gulf Pirate Coast Strait of Hormuz Greater and Lesser Tunbs Al-Faw Peninsula Gulf of Oman Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Aden Balochistan Arabian Peninsula Najd Al-Yamama Hejaz Tihamah Eastern Arabia South Arabia Hadhramaut Arabian Peninsula coastal fog desert Tigris–Euphrates Mesopotamia Upper Mesopotamia Lower Mesopotamia Sawad Nineveh plains Akkad (region) Babylonia Corduene Canaan Aram Aram-Naharaim Eber-Nari Suhum Eastern Mediterranean Mashriq Kurdistan Levant Southern Levant Transjordan Jordan Rift Valley Israel Levantine Sea Golan Heights Hula Valley Galilee Gilead Judea Samaria Arabah Anti-Lebanon Mountains Sinai Peninsula Arabian Desert Syrian Desert Fertile Crescent Azerbaijan Syria Palestine Iranian Plateau Armenian Highlands Caucasus Caucasus Mountains Greater Caucasus Lesser Caucasus North Caucasus South Caucasus Kur-Araz Lowland Lankaran Lowland Alborz Absheron Peninsula Anatolia Isauria Taurus Mountains Cilicia Cappadocia Alpide belt
South	
Orient Greater India Indian subcontinent Himalayas Hindu Kush Bactria Carnatic region Western Ghats Eastern Ghats Ganges Basin Ganges Delta Pashtunistan Punjab Balochistan Kashmir Kashmir Valley Pir Panjal Range Thar Desert Indus Valley Indus River Delta Indus Valley Desert Indo-Gangetic Plain Eastern Coastal Plains Western Coastal Plains Meghalaya subtropical forests MENASA Lower Gangetic plains moist deciduous forests Northwestern Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows Doab Bagar tract Great Rann of Kutch Little Rann of Kutch Deccan Plateau Coromandel Coast Konkan False Divi Point Hindi Belt Ladakh Aksai Chin Gilgit-Baltistan Baltistan Shigar Valley Karakoram Saltoro Mountains Siachen Glacier Bay of Bengal Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Mannar Trans-Karakoram Tract Wakhan Corridor Wakhjir Pass Lakshadweep Paropamisadae Andaman and Nicobar Islands Andaman Islands Nicobar Islands Maldive Islands Alpide belt
Southeast	
Orient Sundaland Mainland Indochina Malay Peninsula Northern Triangle temperate forests Maritime Peninsular Malaysia Sunda Islands Greater Sunda Islands Lesser Sunda Islands Indonesian Archipelago Wallacea Timor New Guinea Bonis Peninsula Papuan Peninsula Huon Peninsula Huon Gulf Bird's Head Peninsula Gazelle Peninsula Philippine Archipelago Luzon Visayas Mindanao Leyte Gulf Gulf of Thailand East Indies Nanyang Alpide belt
Asia-Pacific Tropical Asia Ring of Fire
vte
Regions of Europe
North	
Nordic Northwestern Scandinavia Scandinavian Peninsula Fennoscandia Baltoscandia Jutland Sápmi West Nordic Baltic Baltic Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Iceland Faroe Islands British Isles
East	
Danubian countries Prussia Galicia Volhynia Wallachia Transylvania Moldavia Bukovina Donbass Sloboda Ukraine Sambia Peninsula Amber Coast Curonian Spit Izyum Trail Lithuania Minor Nemunas Delta Baltic Baltic Sea Vyborg Bay Karelia East Karelia Karelian Isthmus Lokhaniemi Southeastern Crimea Rumelia Balkans Aegean Sea Aegean Islands Attica Peloponnese Chalkidiki Gulf of Chania North Caucasus Greater Caucasus Kabardia Istria European Russia Taman Peninsula Southern Russia Kola Peninsula
Central	
Baltic Baltic Sea Alpine states Alpide belt Visegrád Group Rhineland Eastphalia Prussia Bohemia Moravia Silesia Czech Silesia Pomerania Pomerelia Kashubia Bukovina Istria
West	
Benelux Low Countries Northwest British Isles English Channel Channel Islands Cotentin Peninsula Normandy Brittany Batavia Gulf of Lion Iberia Al-Andalus Baetic System Pyrenees Alpide belt
South	
Italian Peninsula Po Valley (Padania) Insular Italy Tuscan Archipelago Aegadian Islands Iberia Al-Andalus Baetic System Gibraltar Arc Southeastern Mediterranean Alpide belt
Germanic Romance Celtic Slavic countries Uralic European Plain Eurasian Steppe Pontic–Caspian steppe Wild Fields Pannonian Basin Great Hungarian Plain Little Hungarian Plain Eastern Slovak Lowland
vte
Regions of North America
Northern	
Eastern Canada Western Canada Canadian Prairies Central Canada Northern Canada Atlantic Canada The Maritimes French Canada English Canada Acadia Acadian Peninsula Quebec City–Windsor Corridor Peace River Country Cypress Hills Palliser's Triangle Canadian Shield Interior Alaska-Yukon lowland taiga Aleutian Arc Aleutian Range Alaska Peninsula Aleutian Islands Gulf of Alaska Kodiak Island Newfoundland (island) Vancouver Island Gulf Islands Strait of Georgia Canadian Arctic Archipelago Labrador Peninsula Gaspé Peninsula Avalon Peninsula Bay de Verde Peninsula Brodeur Peninsula Melville Peninsula Bruce Peninsula Banks Peninsula (Nunavut) Cook Peninsula Gulf of Boothia Georgian Bay Hudson Bay James Bay Greenland Pacific Northwest Inland Northwest Northeast New England Mid-Atlantic Commonwealth Pacific Coast Ranges West Midwest Upper Midwest Mountain states Intermountain West Basin and Range Province Oregon Trail Mormon Corridor Calumet Region Southwest Old Southwest Llano Estacado Central United States Tallgrass prairie South South Central Deep South Upland South Santa Fe de Nuevo México Four Corners East Coast West Coast Gulf Coast Third Coast Eastern United States Appalachia Backcountry Trans-Mississippi Great North Woods Great Plains Interior Plains Great Lakes Great Basin Great Basin Desert Acadia Ozarks Ark-La-Tex Waxhaws Siouxland Twin Tiers Driftless Area Palouse Piedmont Atlantic coastal plain Outer Lands Black Dirt Region Blackstone Valley Piney Woods Rocky Mountains Mojave Desert The Dakotas The Carolinas Shawnee Hills San Fernando Valley Tornado Alley North Coast Lost Coast Emerald Triangle San Francisco Bay Area San Francisco Bay North Bay East Bay Silicon Valley Interior Alaska-Yukon lowland taiga Gulf of Mexico Lower Colorado River Valley Sacramento–San Joaquin River Delta Yukon–Kuskokwim Delta Colville Delta Arkansas Delta Mobile–Tensaw River Delta Mississippi Delta Mississippi River Delta Columbia River Estuary Great Basin High Desert Monterey Peninsula Upper Peninsula of Michigan Lower Peninsula of Michigan Virginia Peninsula Keweenaw Peninsula Middle Peninsula Delmarva Peninsula Alaska Peninsula Kenai Peninsula Niagara Peninsula Beringia Belt regions Bible Belt Black Belt Corn Belt Cotton Belt Frost Belt Rice Belt Rust Belt Sun Belt Snow Belt
Latin	
Northern Mexico Baja California Peninsula Gulf of California Colorado River Delta Gulf of Mexico Soconusco Tierra Caliente La Mixteca La Huasteca Bajío Valley of Mexico Mezquital Valley Sierra Madre de Oaxaca Yucatán Peninsula Basin and Range Province Northern Triangle of Central America Western Caribbean Zone Isthmus of Panama Gulf of Panama Pearl Islands Azuero Peninsula Mosquito Coast West Indies Antilles Greater Antilles Lesser Antilles Leeward Leeward Antilles Windward Lucayan Archipelago Southern Caribbean
Aridoamerica Mesoamerica Oasisamerica Northern Middle Anglo Latin French Hispanic American Cordillera Ring of Fire LAC
vte
Regions of Oceania
Australasia	
Gulf of Carpentaria Zealandia Kula Gulf Australia Capital Country Eastern Australia Lake Eyre basin Murray–Darling basin Northern Australia Nullarbor Plain Outback Southern Australia Maralinga Sunraysia Great Victoria Desert Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf St Vincent Lefevre Peninsula Fleurieu Peninsula Yorke Peninsula Eyre Peninsula Mornington Peninsula Bellarine Peninsula Mount Henry Peninsula
Melanesia	
Islands Region Bismarck Archipelago Solomon Islands North Solomon Islands Solomon Islands Fiji New Caledonia New Guinea Papua New Guinea Republic of West Papua Vanuatu
Micronesia	
Caroline Islands Federated States of Micronesia Palau Kiribati Mariana Islands Guam Northern Mariana Islands Marshall Islands Nauru Wake Island
Polynesia	
Easter Island Hawaiian Islands Cook Islands French Polynesia Austral Islands Gambier Islands Mangareva Islands Marquesas Islands Society Islands Tuamotus Kermadec Islands New Zealand South Island North Island Niue Pitcairn Islands Samoan Islands American Samoa Independent State of Samoa Tokelau Tonga Tuvalu
Ring of Fire
vte
Regions of South America
East	
Amazon basin Atlantic Forest Caatinga Cerrado
North	
Caribbean South America West Indies Los Llanos The Guianas Amazon basin Amazon rainforest Gulf of Paria Paria Peninsula Paraguaná Peninsula Orinoco Delta
South	
Tierra del Fuego Patagonia Pampas Pantanal Gran Chaco Chiquitano dry forests Valdes Peninsula Triple Frontier
West	
Andes Tropical Andes Wet Andes Dry Andes Pariacaca mountain range Altiplano Atacama Desert
Latin Hispanic Bolivarian American Cordillera Ring of Fire LAC
vte
Earth's polar regions
Antarctic	
Antarctic Peninsula East Antarctica West Antarctica Eklund Islands Ecozone Extreme points Islands
Arctic	
Arctic Alaska British Arctic Territories Canadian Arctic Archipelago Finnmark Greenland Northern Canada Northwest Territories Nunavik Nunavut Russian Arctic Sakha Sápmi Yukon North American Arctic
vte
Earth's oceans and seas
Arctic Ocean	
Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Prince Gustav Adolf Sea Pechora Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea
Atlantic Ocean	
Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Lion Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Saint Lawrence Gulf of Sidra Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Marmara Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea
Indian Ocean	
Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bali Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Java Sea Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea
Pacific Ocean	
Arafura Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Ceram Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea Yellow Sea
Southern Ocean	
Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea
Endorheic basins	
Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea
Wikipedia book Book Category Category
‹ The template Subject bar is being considered for deletion. ›
Portals
Access related topics	
Mediterranean Relief.jpgMediterranean portalMediterranean lunch platter.JPGMediterranean cuisine portalTerra.pngGeography portal
Find out more on Wikipedia's
Sister projects	
Media
from CommonsTravel guides
from WikivoyageNews stories
from WikinewsDefinitions
from WiktionaryQuotations
from WikiquoteSource texts
from WikisourceLearning resources
from Wikiversity
Authority control Edit this at Wikidata	
GND: 4074895-9 NARA: 10046199 NDL: 00573122 NKC: ge134513 SELIBR: 153712 VIAF: 239897976 WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 239897976
Categories: European seasGeography of North AfricaMarginal seas of the Atlantic OceanMarine ecoregionsMediterranean SeaNatural history of EuropeSeas of AfricaSeas of Asia
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikivoyage
Languages
Адыгэбзэ
Адыгабзэ
Afrikaans
Alemannisch
አማርኛ
Ænglisc
Аҧсшәа
العربية
Aragonés
ܐܪܡܝܐ
Armãneashti
Arpetan
অসমীয়া
Asturianu
Avañe'ẽ
Авар
Azərbaycanca
تۆرکجه
Bamanankan
বাংলা
Bahasa Banjar
Bân-lâm-gú
Башҡортса
Беларуская
Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎
भोजपुरी
Bikol Central
Български
Boarisch
བོད་ཡིག
Bosanski
Brezhoneg
Буряад
Català
Чӑвашла
Cebuano
Čeština
ChiShona
Corsu
Cymraeg
Dansk
Deutsch
Diné bizaad
Dolnoserbski
डोटेली
Eesti
Ελληνικά
Emiliàn e rumagnòl
Español
Esperanto
Estremeñu
Euskara
فارسی
Fiji Hindi
Føroyskt
Français
Frysk
Gaeilge
Gaelg
Gàidhlig
Galego
贛語
客家語/Hak-kâ-ngî
한국어
Հայերեն
हिन्दी
Hornjoserbsce
Hrvatski
Ido
Ilokano
Bahasa Indonesia
Interlingua
Interlingue
Ирон
Íslenska
Italiano
עברית
Basa Jawa
Kabɩyɛ
ಕನ್ನಡ
Kapampangan
ქართული
Kaszëbsczi
Қазақша
Kernowek
Kiswahili
Kurdî
Кыргызча
Кырык мары
Ladino
ລາວ
Latina
Latviešu
Lëtzebuergesch
Lietuvių
Ligure
Limburgs
Lingála
Lingua Franca Nova
La .lojban.
Luganda
Lumbaart
Magyar
मैथिली
Македонски
Malagasy
മലയാളം
Malti
मराठी
მარგალური
مصرى
مازِرونی
Bahasa Melayu
Baso Minangkabau
Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄
Mirandés
Монгол
မြန်မာဘာသာ
Nederlands
Nedersaksies
नेपाली
नेपाल भाषा
日本語
Napulitano
Нохчийн
Nordfriisk
Norsk
Norsk nynorsk
Nouormand
Occitan
Олык марий
Oromoo
Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча
ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
پنجابی
Papiamentu
Patois
Перем Коми
ភាសាខ្មែរ
Piemontèis
Plattdüütsch
Polski
Ποντιακά
Português
Qaraqalpaqsha
Qırımtatarca
Română
Rumantsch
Runa Simi
Русиньскый
Русский
Саха тыла
ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ
Sardu
Scots
Seeltersk
Shqip
Sicilianu
සිංහල
Simple English
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
Ślůnski
Soomaaliga
کوردی
Српски / srpski
Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
Suomi
Svenska
Tagalog
தமிழ்
Taqbaylit
Tarandíne
Татарча/tatarça
తెలుగు
ไทย
Тоҷикӣ
Türkçe
Türkmençe
Українська
اردو
ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche
Vèneto
Vepsän kel’
Tiếng Việt
Volapük
Võro
Walon
文言
West-Vlams
Winaray
Wolof
吴语
Xitsonga
ייִדיש
Yorùbá
粵語
Zazaki
Zeêuws
Žemaitėška
中文
Edit links
This page was last edited on 16 March 2019, at 15:50 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Anatolia
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
"Asia Minor" redirects here. For other uses, see Asia Minor (disambiguation).
For other uses, see Anatolia (disambiguation).
Anatolia
Native name: Anadolu
AnatolieLimits.jpg
The traditional definition of Anatolia within modern Turkey[1][2]
Geography
Location	
Western Asia
Middle East
Coordinates	39°N 35°ECoordinates: 39°N 35°E
Area	756,000 km2 (292,000 sq mi)[3]
Administration
Turkey
Capital and largest city	Ankara (pop. 5,270,575[4])
Demographics
Demonym	Anatolian
Languages	Turkish, Kurdish, Armenian, Greek, Arabic, Kabardian, various others
Ethnic groups	Turks, Kurds, Armenians, Greeks, Arabs, Laz, various others
Anatolia (from Greek Ἀνατολή Anatolḗ; Turkish: Anadolu "east" or "[sun]rise"), also known as Asia Minor (Medieval and Modern Greek: Μικρά Ἀσία Mikrá Asía, "small Asia"; Turkish: Küçük Asya), Asian Turkey, the Anatolian peninsula, or the Anatolian plateau, is the westernmost protrusion of Asia, which makes up the majority of modern-day Turkey. The region is bounded by the Black Sea to the north, the Mediterranean Sea to the south, the Armenian Highlands to the east, and the Aegean Sea to the west. The Sea of Marmara forms a connection between the Black and Aegean Seas through the Bosphorus and Dardanelles straits and separates Anatolia from Thrace on the European mainland.

The eastern border of Anatolia is traditionally held to be a line between the Gulf of Alexandretta and the Black Sea, bounded by the Armenian Highland to the east and Mesopotamia to the southeast. Thus, traditionally Anatolia is the territory that comprises approximately the western two-thirds of the Asian part of Turkey. Nowadays, Anatolia is also often considered to be synonymous with Asian Turkey, which comprises almost the entire country;[5] its eastern and southeastern borders are widely taken to be Turkey's eastern border.[6] By some definitions, the area called the Armenian highlands lies beyond the boundary of the Anatolian plateau. The official name of this inland region is the Eastern Anatolia Region.[7][8]

The ancient inhabitants of Anatolia spoke the now-extinct Anatolian languages, which were largely replaced by the Greek language starting from classical antiquity and during the Hellenistic, Roman and Byzantine periods. Major Anatolian languages included Hittite, Luwian, and Lydian among other more poorly attested relatives. The Turkification of Anatolia began under the Seljuk Empire in the late 11th century and continued under the Ottoman Empire between the late 13th and early 20th centuries. However, various non-Turkic languages continue to be spoken by minorities in Anatolia today, including Kurdish, Neo-Aramaic, Armenian, Arabic, Laz, Georgian and Greek. Other ancient peoples in the region included Galatians, Hurrians, Assyrians, Hattians, Cimmerians, as well as Ionian, Dorian, and Aeolian Greeks.


Contents
1	Geography
2	Etymology
3	Names
4	History
4.1	Prehistory
4.2	Ancient Near East (Bronze and Iron Ages)
4.2.1	Hattians and Hurrians
4.2.2	Assyrian Empire (21st–18th centuries BC)
4.2.3	Hittite Kingdom and Empire (17th–12th centuries BC)
4.2.4	Neo-Hittite kingdoms (c. 1180–700 BC)
4.2.5	Neo-Assyrian Empire (10th–7th centuries BC)
4.2.6	Cimmerian and Scythian invasions (8th–7th centuries BC)
4.2.7	Greek West
4.3	Classical Antiquity
4.4	Early Christian Period
4.5	Late Medieval Period
4.6	Ottoman Empire
4.7	Modern times
5	Geology
5.1	Climate
5.2	Ecoregions
6	Demographics
7	Cuisine
8	See also
9	References
10	Bibliography
11	Further reading
12	External links
Geography
Main article: Geography of Turkey

The location of Turkey (within the rectangle) in reference to the European continent. Anatolia roughly corresponds to the Asian part of Turkey

1907 map of Asia Minor, showing the local ancient kingdoms. The map includes the East Aegean Islands and the island of Cyprus to Anatolia's continental shelf.
Traditionally, Anatolia is considered to extend in the east to an indefinite line running from the Gulf of Alexandretta to the Black Sea,[9] coterminous with the Anatolian Plateau. This traditional geographical definition is used, for example, in the latest edition of Merriam-Webster's Geographical Dictionary,[1] Under this definition, Anatolia is bounded to the east by the Armenian Highlands, and the Euphrates before that river bends to the southeast to enter Mesopotamia.[2] To the southeast, it is bounded by the ranges that separate it from the Orontes valley in Syria (region) and the Mesopotamian plain.[2]

Following the Armenian genocide, Ottoman Armenia was renamed "Eastern Anatolia" by the newly established Turkish government.[10][11] Vazken Davidian terms the expanded use of "Anatolia" to apply to territory formerly referred to as Armenia an "ahistorical imposition", and notes that a growing body of literature is uncomfortable with referring to the Ottoman East as "Eastern Anatolia".[12] Most archeological sources consider the boundary of Anatolia to be Turkey's eastern border.[13]

The highest mountains in Anatolia are Mount Süphan (4058 m) and Mount Ararat (5123 m).[14] The Euphrates, Araxes Karasu and Murat rivers connect the Anatolian plateau to the South Caucasus and the Upper Euphrates Valley. Along with the Çoruh, these rivers are the longest in Anatolia.[15]

Etymology
The oldest known reference to Anatolia – as “Land of the Hatti” – appears on Mesopotamian cuneiform tablets from the period of the Akkadian Empire (2350–2150 BC).[citation needed] The first recorded name the Greeks used for the Anatolian peninsula, Ἀσία (Asía),[16] presumably echoed the name of the Assuwa league in western Anatolia.[citation needed] As the name "Asia" broadened its scope to apply to other areas east of the Mediterranean, Greeks in Late Antiquity came to use the name Μικρὰ Ἀσία (Mikrá Asía) or Asia Minor, meaning "Lesser Asia" to refer to present-day Anatolia.

The English-language name Anatolia itself derives from the Greek ἀνατολή (anatolḗ) meaning “the East” or more literally “sunrise” (comparable to the Latin-derived terms "levant" and "orient").[17][18] The precise reference of this term has varied over time, perhaps originally referring to the Aeolian, Ionian and Dorian colonies on the west coast of Asia Minor. In the Byzantine Empire, the Anatolic Theme (Ἀνατολικόν θέμα) was a theme covering the western and central parts of Turkey's present-day Central Anatolia Region.[19][20]

The term "Anatolia" is Medieval Latin.[21]

The modern Turkish form of Anatolia, Anadolu, derives from the Greek name Aνατολή (Anatolḗ). The Russian male name Anatoly and the French Anatole share the same linguistic origin.

Names
Further information: Geographical name changes in Turkey
The term "Anatolia" originally referred to a northwestern Byzantine province. By the 12th century Europeans had started referring to Anatolia as Turchia. It has historically also been called "Asia Minor". In earlier times, it was called "(Land of the) Rûm" by both the Greeks and the Seljuqs.[22]

During the era of the Ottoman Empire mapmakers outside the Empire referred to the mountainous plateau in eastern Anatolia as Armenia. Other contemporary sources called the same area Kurdistan.[23] Geographers have variously used the terms east Anatolian plateau and Armenian plateau to refer to the region, although the territory encompassed by each term largely overlaps with the other. According to archaeologist Lori Khatchadourian this difference in terminology "primarily result[s] from the shifting political fortunes and cultural trajectories of the region since the nineteenth century."[13]

Turkey's First Geography Congress in 1941 created two regions to the east of the Gulf of Iskenderun-Black Sea line named the Eastern Anatolia Region and the Southeastern Anatolia Region,[24] the former largely corresponding to the western part of the Armenian Highland, the latter to the northern part of the Mesopotamian plain. According to Richard Hovannisian this changing of toponyms was "necessary to obscure all evidence" of Armenian presence as part of a campaign of genocide denial embarked upon by the newly established Turkish government and what Hovannisian calls its "foreign collaborators".[25]

History
Main article: History of Anatolia
Prehistory
Main article: Prehistory of Anatolia

Mural of aurochs, a deer, and humans in Çatalhöyük, which is the largest and best-preserved Neolithic site found to date. It was registered as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2012.[26]
Human habitation in Anatolia dates back to the Paleolithic.[27] Neolithic Anatolia has been proposed as the homeland of the Indo-European language family, although linguists tend to favour a later origin in the steppes north of the Black Sea. However, it is clear that the Anatolian languages, the earliest attested branch of Indo-European, have been spoken in Anatolia since at least the 19th century BC.[citation needed]

Ancient Near East (Bronze and Iron Ages)
Hattians and Hurrians
The earliest historical records of Anatolia stem from the southeast of the region and are from the Mesopotamian-based Akkadian Empire during the reign of Sargon of Akkad in the 24th century BC. Scholars generally believe the earliest indigenous populations of Anatolia were the Hattians and Hurrians. The Hattians spoke a language of unclear affiliation, and the Hurrian language belongs to a small family called Hurro-Urartian, all these languages now being extinct; relationships with indigenous languages of the Caucasus have been proposed[28] but are not generally accepted. The region was famous for exporting raw materials, and areas of Hattian- and Hurrian-populated southeast Anatolia were colonised by the Akkadians.[29]

Assyrian Empire (21st–18th centuries BC)
After the fall of the Akkadian Empire in the mid-21st century BC, the Assyrians, who were the northern branch of the Akkadian people, colonised parts of the region between the 21st and mid-18th centuries BC and claimed its resources, notably silver. One of the numerous cuneiform records dated circa 20th century BC, found in Anatolia at the Assyrian colony of Kanesh, uses an advanced system of trading computations and credit lines.[29]

Hittite Kingdom and Empire (17th–12th centuries BC)
Main article: History of the Hittites

The Lion Gate at Hattusa, capital of the Hittite Empire. The city's history dates to before 2000 BC.
Unlike the Akkadians and their descendants, the Assyrians, whose Anatolian possessions were peripheral to their core lands in Mesopotamia, the Hittites were centred at Hattusa (modern Boğazkale) in north-central Anatolia by the 17th century BC. They were speakers of an Indo-European language, the Hittite language, or nesili (the language of Nesa) in Hittite. The Hittites originated of local ancient cultures that grew in Anatolia, in addition to the arrival of Indo-European languages. Attested for the first time in the Assyrian tablets of Nesa around 2000BC, they conquered Hattusa in the 18th century BC, imposing themselves over Hattian- and Hurrian-speaking populations. According to the widely accepted Kurgan theory on the Proto-Indo-European homeland, however, the Hittites (along with the other Indo-European ancient Anatolians) were themselves relatively recent immigrants to Anatolia from the north. However, they did not necessarily displace the population genetically, they would rather assimilate into the former peoples' culture, preserving the Hittite language however.

The Hittites adopted the cuneiform script, invented in Mesopotamia. During the Late Bronze Age circa 1650 BC, they created a kingdom, the Hittite New Kingdom, which became an empire in the 14th century BC after the conquest of Kizzuwatna in the south-east and the defeat of the Assuwa league in western Anatolia. The empire reached its height in the 13th century BC, controlling much of Asia Minor, northwestern Syria and northwest upper Mesopotamia. They failed to reach the Anatolian coasts of the Black Sea, however, as a non-Indo-European people, the semi-nomadic pastoralist and tribal Kaskians, had established themselves there, displacing earlier Palaic-speaking Indo-Europeans.[30] Much of the history of the Hittite Empire concerned war with the rival empires of Egypt, Assyria and the Mitanni.[31]

The Egyptians eventually withdrew from the region after failing to gain the upper hand over the Hittites and becoming wary of the power of Assyria, which had destroyed the Mitanni Empire.[31] The Assyrians and Hittites were then left to battle over control of eastern and southern Anatolia and colonial territories in Syria. The Assyrians had better success than the Egyptians, annexing much Hittite (and Hurrian) territory in these regions.[32]

Neo-Hittite kingdoms (c. 1180–700 BC)
After 1180 BC, during the Late Bronze Age collapse, the Hittite empire disintegrated into several independent Syro-Hittite states, subsequent to losing much territory to the Middle Assyrian Empire and being finally overrun by the Phrygians, another Indo-European people who are believed to have migrated from the Balkans. The Phrygian expansion into southeast Anatolia was eventually halted by the Assyrians, who controlled that region.[32]

Arameans
Arameans encroached over the borders of south central Anatolia in the century or so after the fall of the Hittite empire, and some of the Syro-Hittite states in this region became an amalgam of Hittites and Arameans. These became known as Syro-Hittite states.

Luwians

Lycian rock cut tombs of Kaunos (Dalyan)
Another Indo-European people, the Luwians, rose to prominence in central and western Anatolia circa 2000 BC. Their language belonged to the same linguistic branch as Hittite.[33] The general consensus amongst scholars is that Luwian was spoken across a large area of western Anatolia, including (possibly) Wilusa (Troy), the Seha River Land (to be identified with the Hermos and/or Kaikos valley), and the kingdom of Mira-Kuwaliya with its core territory of the Maeander valley.[34] From the 9th century BC, Luwian regions coalesced into a number of states such as Lydia, Caria and Lycia, all of which had Hellenic influence.

Neo-Assyrian Empire (10th–7th centuries BC)
From the 10th to late 7th centuries BC, much of Anatolia (particularly the southeastern regions) fell to the Neo-Assyrian Empire, including all of the Syro-Hittite states, Tabal, Kingdom of Commagene, the Cimmerians and Scythians and swathes of Cappadocia.

The Neo-Assyrian empire collapsed due to a bitter series of civil wars followed by a combined attack by Medes, Persians, Scythians and their own Babylonian relations. The last Assyrian city to fall was Harran in southeast Anatolia. This city was the birthplace of the last king of Babylon, the Assyrian Nabonidus and his son and regent Belshazzar. Much of the region then fell to the short-lived Iran-based Median Empire, with the Babylonians and Scythians briefly appropriating some territory.

Cimmerian and Scythian invasions (8th–7th centuries BC)
From the late 8th century BC, a new wave of Indo-European-speaking raiders entered northern and northeast Anatolia: the Cimmerians and Scythians. The Cimmerians overran Phrygia and the Scythians threatened to do the same to Urartu and Lydia, before both were finally checked by the Assyrians.

Greek West

Portrait of an Achaemenid Satrap of Asia Minor (Heraclea, in Bithynia), end of 6th century BCE, probably under Darius I.[35]
The north-western coast of Anatolia was inhabited by Greeks of the Achaean/Mycenaean culture from the 20th century BC, related to the Greeks of south eastern Europe and the Aegean.[36] Beginning with the Bronze Age collapse at the end of the 2nd millennium BC, the west coast of Anatolia was settled by Ionian Greeks, usurping the area of the related but earlier Mycenaean Greeks. Over several centuries, numerous Ancient Greek city-states were established on the coasts of Anatolia. Greeks started Western philosophy on the western coast of Anatolia (Pre-Socratic philosophy).[36]

Classical Antiquity

Asia Minor in the Greco-Roman period. The classical regions and their main settlements

Asia Minor in the early 2nd century AD. The Roman provinces under Trajan.

The temple of Athena (funded by Alexander the Great) in the ancient Greek city of Priene
In classical antiquity, Anatolia was described by Herodotus and later historians as divided into regions that were diverse in culture, language and religious practices.[37] The northern regions included Bithynia, Paphlagonia and Pontus; to the west were Mysia, Lydia and Caria; and Lycia, Pamphylia and Cilicia belonged to the southern shore. There were also several inland regions: Phrygia, Cappadocia, Pisidia and Galatia.[37]


The Dying Galatian was a famous statue commissioned some time between 230–220 BC by King Attalos I of Pergamon to honor his victory over the Celtic Galatians in Anatolia.
Anatolia is known as the birthplace of minted coinage (as opposed to unminted coinage, which first appears in Mesopotamia at a much earlier date) as a medium of exchange, some time in the 7th century BC in Lydia. The use of minted coins continued to flourish during the Greek and Roman eras.[38][39]

During the 6th century BC, all of Anatolia was conquered by the Persian Achaemenid Empire, the Persians having usurped the Medes as the dominant dynasty in Iran. In 499 BC, the Ionian city-states on the west coast of Anatolia rebelled against Persian rule. The Ionian Revolt, as it became known, though quelled, initiated the Greco-Persian Wars, which ended in a Greek victory in 449 BC, and the Ionian cities regained their independence, alongside the withdrawal of the Persian forces from their European territories.

In 334 BC, the Macedonian Greek king Alexander the Great conquered the peninsula from the Achaemenid Persian Empire.[40] Alexander's conquest opened up the interior of Asia Minor to Greek settlement and influence.


Sanctuary of Commagene Kings on Mount Nemrut (1st century BC)
Following the death of Alexander and the breakup of his empire, Anatolia was ruled by a series of Hellenistic kingdoms, such as the Attalids of Pergamum and the Seleucids, the latter controlling most of Anatolia. A period of peaceful Hellenization followed, such that the local Anatolian languages had been supplanted by Greek by the 1st century BC. In 133 BC the last Attalid king bequeathed his kingdom to the Roman Republic, and western and central Anatolia came under Roman control, but Hellenistic culture remained predominant. Further annexations by Rome, in particular of the Kingdom of Pontus by Pompey, brought all of Anatolia under Roman control, except for the eastern frontier with the Parthian Empire, which remained unstable for centuries, causing a series of wars, culminating in the Roman-Parthian Wars.

Early Christian Period
After the division of the Roman Empire, Anatolia became part of the East Roman, or Byzantine Empire. Anatolia was one of the first places where Christianity spread, so that by the 4th century AD, western and central Anatolia were overwhelmingly Christian and Greek-speaking. For the next 600 years, while Imperial possessions in Europe were subjected to barbarian invasions, Anatolia would be the center of the Hellenic world.[citation needed]

It was one of the wealthiest and most densely populated places in the Late Roman Empire. Anatolia's wealth grew during the 4th and 5th centuries thanks, in part, to the Pilgrim's Road that ran through the peninsula. Literary evidence about the rural landscape has come down to us from the hagiographies of 6th century Nicholas of Sion and 7th century Theodore of Sykeon. Large urban centers included Ephesus, Pergamum, Sardis and Aphrodisias. Scholars continue to debate the cause of urban decline in the 6th and 7th centuries variously attributing it to the Plague of Justinian (541), and the 7th century Persian incursion and Arab conquest of the Levant.[41]

In the ninth and tenth century a resurgent Byzantine Empire regained its lost territories, including even long lost territory such as Armenia and Syria (ancient Aram).[citation needed]

Late Medieval Period

Byzantine Anatolia and the Byzantine-Arab frontier zone in the mid-9th century

Beyliks and other states around Anatolia, c. 1300.
In the 10 years following the Battle of Manzikert in 1071, the Seljuk Turks from Central Asia migrated over large areas of Anatolia, with particular concentrations around the northwestern rim.[42] The Turkish language and the Islamic religion were gradually introduced as a result of the Seljuk conquest, and this period marks the start of Anatolia's slow transition from predominantly Christian and Greek-speaking, to predominantly Muslim and Turkish-speaking (although ethnic groups such as Armenians, Greeks, and Assyrians remained numerous and retained Christianity and their native languages). In the following century, the Byzantines managed to reassert their control in western and northern Anatolia. Control of Anatolia was then split between the Byzantine Empire and the Seljuk Sultanate of Rûm, with the Byzantine holdings gradually being reduced.[43]

In 1255, the Mongols swept through eastern and central Anatolia, and would remain until 1335. The Ilkhanate garrison was stationed near Ankara.[43][44] After the decline of the Ilkhanate from 1335–1353, the Mongol Empire's legacy in the region was the Uyghur Eretna Dynasty that was overthrown by Kadi Burhan al-Din in 1381.[45]

By the end of the 14th century, most of Anatolia was controlled by various Anatolian beyliks. Smyrna fell in 1330, and the last Byzantine stronghold in Anatolia, Philadelphia, fell in 1390. The Turkmen Beyliks were under the control of the Mongols, at least nominally, through declining Seljuk sultans.[46][47] The Beyliks did not mint coins in the names of their own leaders while they remained under the suzerainty of the Mongol Ilkhanids.[48] The Osmanli ruler Osman I was the first Turkish ruler who minted coins in his own name in 1320s, for it bears the legend "Minted by Osman son of Ertugrul".[49] Since the minting of coins was a prerogative accorded in Islamic practice only to a sovereign, it can be considered that the Osmanli, or Ottoman Turks, became formally independent from the Mongol Khans.[50]

Ottoman Empire
Among the Turkish leaders, the Ottomans emerged as great power under Osman I and his son Orhan I.[51][52] The Anatolian beyliks were successively absorbed into the rising Ottoman Empire during the 15th century.[53] It is not well understood how the Osmanlı, or Ottoman Turks, came to dominate their neighbours, as the history of medieval Anatolia is still little known.[54] The Ottomans completed the conquest of the peninsula in 1517 with the taking of Halicarnassus (modern Bodrum) from the Knights of Saint John.[55]

Modern times

Ethnographic map of Anatolia from 1911.
With the acceleration of the decline of the Ottoman Empire in the early 19th century, and as a result of the expansionist policies of the Russian Empire in the Caucasus, many Muslim nations and groups in that region, mainly Circassians, Tatars, Azeris, Lezgis, Chechens and several Turkic groups left their homelands and settled in Anatolia. As the Ottoman Empire further shrank in the Balkan regions and then fragmented during the Balkan Wars, much of the non-Christian populations of its former possessions, mainly Balkan Muslims (Bosnian Muslims, Albanians, Turks, Muslim Bulgarians and Greek Muslims such as the Vallahades from Greek Macedonia), were resettled in various parts of Anatolia, mostly in formerly Christian villages throughout Anatolia.

A continuous reverse migration occurred since the early 19th century, when Greeks from Anatolia, Constantinople and Pontus area migrated toward the newly independent Kingdom of Greece, and also towards the United States, southern part of the Russian Empire, Latin America and rest of Europe.

Following the Russo-Persian Treaty of Turkmenchay (1828) and the incorporation of the Eastern Armenia into the Russian Empire, another migration involved the large Armenian population of Anatolia, which recorded significant migration rates from Western Armenia (Eastern Anatolia) toward the Russian Empire, especially toward its newly established Armenian provinces.

Anatolia remained multi-ethnic until the early 20th century (see the rise of nationalism under the Ottoman Empire). During World War I, the Armenian Genocide, the Greek genocide (especially in Pontus), and the Assyrian genocide almost entirely removed the ancient indigenous communities of Armenian, Greek, and Assyrian populations in Anatolia and surrounding regions. Following the Greco-Turkish War of 1919–1922, most remaining ethnic Anatolian Greeks were forced out during the 1923 population exchange between Greece and Turkey. Many more have left Turkey since, leaving fewer than 5,000 Greeks in Anatolia today. Since the foundation of the Republic of Turkey in 1923, Anatolia has been within Turkey, its inhabitants being mainly Turks and Kurds (see demographics of Turkey and history of Turkey).

Geology
Main article: Geology of Turkey
Anatolia's terrain is structurally complex. A central massif composed of uplifted blocks and downfolded troughs, covered by recent deposits and giving the appearance of a plateau with rough terrain, is wedged between two folded mountain ranges that converge in the east. True lowland is confined to a few narrow coastal strips along the Aegean, Mediterranean, and Black Sea coasts. Flat or gently sloping land is rare and largely confined to the deltas of the Kızıl River, the coastal plains of Çukurova and the valley floors of the Gediz River and the Büyük Menderes River as well as some interior high plains in Anatolia, mainly around Lake Tuz (Salt Lake) and the Konya Basin (Konya Ovasi).

There are two mountain ranges in southern Anatolia: the Taurus and the Zagros mountains.[56]

Climate
Main article: Climate of Turkey
Temperatures of Anatolia

Ankara (central Anatolia)

 

Antalya (southern Anatolia)

 

Van (eastern Anatolia)

Anatolia has a varied range of climates. The central plateau is characterized by a continental climate, with hot summers and cold snowy winters. The south and west coasts enjoy a typical Mediterranean climate, with mild rainy winters, and warm dry summers.[57] The Black Sea and Marmara coasts have a temperate oceanic climate, with cool foggy summers and much rainfall throughout the year.

Ecoregions
There is a diverse number of plant and animal communities.

The mountains and coastal plain of northern Anatolia experiences humid and mild climate. There are temperate broadleaf, mixed and coniferous forests. The central and eastern plateau, with its drier continental climate, has deciduous forests and forest steppes. Western and southern Anatolia, which have a Mediterranean climate, contain Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub ecoregions.

Euxine-Colchic deciduous forests: These temperate broadleaf and mixed forests extend across northern Anatolia, lying between the mountains of northern Anatolia and the Black Sea. They include the enclaves of temperate rainforest lying along the southeastern coast of the Black Sea in eastern Turkey and Georgia.[58]
Northern Anatolian conifer and deciduous forests: These forests occupy the mountains of northern Anatolia, running east and west between the coastal Euxine-Colchic forests and the drier, continental climate forests of central and eastern Anatolia.[59]
Central Anatolian deciduous forests: These forests of deciduous oaks and evergreen pines cover the plateau of central Anatolia.[60]
Central Anatolian steppe: These dry grasslands cover the drier valleys and surround the saline lakes of central Anatolia, and include halophytic (salt tolerant) plant communities.[61]
Eastern Anatolian deciduous forests: This ecoregion occupies the plateau of eastern Anatolia. The drier and more continental climate is beneficial for steppe-forests dominated by deciduous oaks, with areas of shrubland, montane forest, and valley forest.[62]
Anatolian conifer and deciduous mixed forests: These forests occupy the western, Mediterranean-climate portion of the Anatolian plateau. Pine forests and mixed pine and oak woodlands and shrublands are predominant.[63]
Aegean and Western Turkey sclerophyllous and mixed forests: These Mediterranean-climate forests occupy the coastal lowlands and valleys of western Anatolia bordering the Aegean Sea. The ecoregion has forests of Turkish pine (Pinus brutia), oak forests and woodlands, and maquis shrubland of Turkish pine and evergreen sclerophyllous trees and shrubs, including Olive (Olea europaea), Strawberry Tree (Arbutus unedo), Arbutus andrachne, Kermes Oak (Quercus coccifera), and Bay Laurel (Laurus nobilis).[64]
Southern Anatolian montane conifer and deciduous forests: These mountain forests occupy the Mediterranean-climate Taurus Mountains of southern Anatolia. Conifer forests are predominant, chiefly Anatolian black pine (Pinus nigra), Cedar of Lebanon (Cedrus libani), Taurus fir (Abies cilicica), and juniper (Juniperus foetidissima and J. excelsa). Broadleaf trees include oaks, hornbeam, and maples.[65]
Eastern Mediterranean conifer-sclerophyllous-broadleaf forests: This ecoregion occupies the coastal strip of southern Anatolia between the Taurus Mountains and the Mediterranean Sea. Plant communities include broadleaf sclerophyllous maquis shrublands, forests of Aleppo Pine (Pinus halepensis) and Turkish Pine (Pinus brutia), and dry oak (Quercus spp.) woodlands and steppes.[66]
Demographics
Main article: Demographics of Turkey
Almost 80% of the people currently residing in Anatolia are Turks. Kurds constitute a major community in southeastern Anatolia,[67] and are the largest ethnic minority. Abkhazians, Albanians, Arabs, Arameans, Armenians, Assyrians, Azerbaijanis, Bosnian Muslims, Circassians, Gagauz, Georgians, Serbs, Greeks, Hemshin, Jews, Laz, Levantines, Pomaks, Zazas and a number of other ethnic groups also live in Anatolia in smaller numbers.[citation needed]

Cuisine
Bamia is a traditional Anatolian-era stew dish prepared using lamb, okra and tomatoes as primary ingredients.[68]

See also
Aeolis
Alacahöyük
Anatolian hypothesis
Anatolian languages
Anatolianism
Anatolian leopard
Anatolian Plate
Anatolian Shepherd
Anatolian beyliks
Ancient kingdoms of Anatolia
Antigonid dynasty
Attalid dynasty
Bithynia
Byzantine Empire
Cappadocia
Caria
Çatalhöyük
Cilicia
Doris (Asia Minor)
Empire of Nicaea
Empire of Trebizond
Ephesus
Galatia
Gordium
Halicarnassus
Hattusa
History of Anatolia
Hittites
Ionia
Lycaonia
Lycia
Lydia
Midas
Miletus
Myra
Mysia
Ottoman Empire
Pamphylia
Paphlagonia
Pentarchy
Pergamon
Phrygia
Pisidia
Pontic Greeks
Pontus
Rumi
Saint Anatolia
Saint John
Saint Nicholas
Saint Paul
Sardis
Seleucid Empire
Great Seljuq Empire
Seven churches of Asia
Seven Sleepers
Sultanate of Rum
Tarsus
Troad
Troy
Turkey
Turkic migration
References
 Hopkins, Daniel J.; Staff, Merriam-Webster; 편집부 (2001). Merriam-Webster's Geographical Dictionary. p. 46. ISBN 0 87779 546 0. Retrieved 18 May 2001.
 Stephen Mitchell, Anatolia: Land, Men, and Gods in Asia Minor. The Celts in Anatolia and the impact of Roman rule. Clarendon Press, Aug 24, 1995 - 266 pages. ISBN 978-0198150299 [1]
 Sansal, Burak. "History of Anatolia".
 (TÜİK), Türkiye İstatistik Kurumu. "Türkiye İstatistik Kurumu, Adrese Dayalı Nüfus Kayıt Sistemi Sonuçları, 2015". www.tuik.gov.tr.
 Hooglund, Eric (2004). "Anatolia". Encyclopedia of the Modern Middle East and North Africa. Macmillan/Gale – via Encyclopedia.com. Anatolia comprises more than 95 percent of Turkey's total land area.
 Khatchadourian, Lori (2011-09-05). "The Iron Age in Eastern Anatolia". The Oxford Handbook of Ancient Anatolia. 1. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195376142.013.0020. Retrieved 2018-12-05.
 Adalian, Rouben Paul (2010). Historical dictionary of Armenia (2nd ed.). Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press. pp. 336–8. ISBN 978-0810874503.
 Grierson, Otto Mørkholm ; edited by Philip; Westermark, Ulla (1991). Early Hellenistic coinage : from the accession of Alexander to the Peace of Apamea (336–188 B.C.) (Repr. ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 175. ISBN 978-0521395045.
 Philipp Niewohner (17 March 2017). The Archaeology of Byzantine Anatolia: From the End of Late Antiquity until the Coming of the Turks. Oxford University Press. pp. 18–. ISBN 978-0-19-061047-0.
 Sahakyan, Lusine (2010). Turkification of the Toponyms in the Ottoman Empire and the Republic of Turkey. Montreal: Arod Books. ISBN 978-0969987970.
 Hovannisian, Richard (2007). The Armenian genocide cultural and ethical legacies. New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Publishers. p. 3. ISBN 978-1412835923.
 Vazken Khatchig Davidian, "Imagining Ottoman Armenia: Realism and Allegory in Garabed Nichanian's Provincial Wedding in Moush and Late Ottoman Art Criticism", p7 & footnote 34, in Études arméniennes contemporaines volume 6, 2015.
 Khatchadourian, Lori (2011-09-05). "The Iron Age in Eastern Anatolia". The Oxford Handbook of Ancient Anatolia. 1. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195376142.013.0020. Retrieved 2018-05-06.
 Fevzi Özgökçe; Kit Tan; Vladimir Stevanović (2005). "A new subspecies of Silene acaulis (Caryophyllaceae) from East Anatolia, Turkey". Annales Botanici Fennici. 42 (2): 143–149. JSTOR 23726860.
 Palumbi, Giulio (2011-09-05). "The Chalcolithic of Eastern Anatolia". The Oxford Handbook of Ancient Anatolia. 1. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195376142.013.0009. Retrieved 2018-05-06.
 Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, Ἀσία, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus
 Henry George Liddell; Robert Scott. "A Greek-English Lexicon".
 "Online Etymology Dictionary".
 "On the First Thema, called Anatolikón. This theme is called Anatolikón or Theme of the Anatolics, not because it is above and in the direction of the east where the sun rises, but because it lies to the East of Byzantium and Europe." Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus, De Thematibus, ed. A. Pertusi. Vatican: Vatican Library, 1952, pp. 59–61.
 John Haldon, Byzantium, a History, 2002. Page 32
 Anatolia - Online Etymology Dictionary
 Everett-Heath, John (2018-09-20). "Anatolia". The Concise Dictionary of World Place-Names. 1. Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acref/9780191866326.001.0001. ISBN 978-0-19-186632-6. Retrieved 2018-12-05.
 Suny, Ronald Grigor (2015-03-22). "They Can Live in the Desert but Nowhere Else": A History of the Armenian Genocide. Princeton University Press. p. 31. ISBN 978-1-4008-6558-1.
 Ali Yiğit, "Geçmişten Günümüze Türkiye'yi Bölgelere Ayıran Çalışmalar ve Yapılması Gerekenler", Ankara Üniversitesi Türkiye Coğrafyası Araştırma ve Uygulama Merkezi, IV. Ulural Coğrafya Sempozyumu, "Avrupa Birliği Sürecindeki Türkiye'de Bölgesel Farklılıklar", pp. 34–35.
 Hovannisian, Richard G. (1998). Remembrance and Denial: The Case of the Armenian Genocide. Wayne State University Press. ISBN 978-0-8143-2777-7.
 "Çatalhöyük added to UNESCO World Heritage List". Global Heritage Fund. 3 July 2012. Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Retrieved 9 February 2013.
 Stiner, Mary C.; Kuhn, Steven L.; Güleç, Erksin (2013). "Early Upper Paleolithic shell beads at Üçağızlı Cave I (Turkey): Technology and the socioeconomic context of ornament life-histories". Journal of Human Evolution. 64 (5): 380–398. doi:10.1016/j.jhevol.2013.01.008. ISSN 0047-2484. PMID 23481346.
 Bryce 2005:12
 Freeman, Charles (1999). Egypt, Greece and Rome: Civilizations of the Ancient Mediterranean. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-872194-9.
 Carruba, O. Das Palaische. Texte, Grammatik, Lexikon. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1970. StBoT 10
 Georges Roux - Ancient Iraq
 Georges Roux, Ancient Iraq. Penguin Books, 1966.
 Melchert 2003
 Watkins 1994; id. 1995:144–51; Starke 1997; Melchert 2003; for the geography Hawkins 1998
 CAHN, HERBERT A.; GERIN, DOMINIQUE (1988). "Themistocles at Magnesia". The Numismatic Chronicle (1966-). 148: 20 & Plate 3. JSTOR 42668124.
 Carl Roebuck, The World of Ancient Times
 Yavuz, Mehmet Fatih (2010). "Anatolia". The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Greece and Rome. Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acref/9780195170726.001.0001. ISBN 978-0-19-517072-6. Retrieved 2018-12-05.
 Howgego, C. J. (1995). Ancient History from Coins. ISBN 978-0-415-08992-0.
 Asia Minor Coins - an index of Greek and Roman coins from Asia Minor (ancient Anatolia)
 Roisman, Joseph; Worthington, Ian (2010). A Companion to Ancient Macedonia. John Wiley and Sons. ISBN 978-1-4051-7936-2.
 Thonemann, Peter ThonemannPeter (2018-03-22). "Anatolia". The Oxford Dictionary of Late Antiquity. 1. Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acref/9780198662778.001.0001. ISBN 978-0-19-866277-8. Retrieved 2018-12-06.
 Angold, Michael (1997). The Byzantine Empire 1025–1204. p. 117. ISBN 978-0-582-29468-4.
 H. M. Balyuzi Muḥammad and the course of Islám, p. 342
 John Freely Storm on Horseback: The Seljuk Warriors of Turkey, p. 83
 Clifford Edmund Bosworth-The new Islamic dynasties: a chronological and genealogical manual, p. 234
 Mehmet Fuat Köprülü, Gary Leiser-The origins of the Ottoman Empire, p. 33
 Peter Partner God of battles: holy wars of Christianity and Islam, p. 122
 Osman's Dream: The History of the Ottoman Empire, p. 13
 Artuk - Osmanli Beyliginin Kurucusu, 27f
 Pamuk - A Monetary History, pp. 30–31
 "Osman I | Ottoman sultan". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 2018-04-23.
 "Orhan | Ottoman sultan". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 2018-04-23.
 Fleet, Kate (2010). "The rise of the Ottomans". The rise of the Ottomans (Chapter 11) - The New Cambridge History of Islam. Cambridge Core. pp. 313–331. doi:10.1017/CHOL9780521839570.013. ISBN 9781139056151. Retrieved 2018-04-23.
 Finkel, Caroline (2007). Osman's Dream: The History of the Ottoman Empire. Basic Books. p. 5. ISBN 978-0-465-00850-6. Retrieved 6 June 2013.
 electricpulp.com. "HALICARNASSUS – Encyclopaedia Iranica". www.iranicaonline.org. Retrieved 2018-04-23.
 Cemen, Ibrahim; Yilmaz, Yucel (2017-03-03). Active Global Seismology: Neotectonics and Earthquake Potential of the Eastern Mediterranean Region. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1-118-94501-8.
 Prothero, W.G. (1920). Anatolia. London: H.M. Stationery Office.
 "Euxine-Colchic deciduous forests". Terrestrial Ecoregions. World Wildlife Fund. Retrieved May 25, 2008.
 "Northern Anatolian conifer and deciduous forests". Terrestrial Ecoregions. World Wildlife Fund. Retrieved May 25, 2008.
 "Central Anatolian deciduous forests". Terrestrial Ecoregions. World Wildlife Fund. Retrieved May 25, 2008.
 "Central Anatolian steppe". Terrestrial Ecoregions. World Wildlife Fund. Retrieved May 25, 2008.
 "Eastern Anatolian deciduous forests". Terrestrial Ecoregions. World Wildlife Fund. Retrieved May 25, 2008.
 "Anatolian conifer and deciduous mixed forests". Terrestrial Ecoregions. World Wildlife Fund. Retrieved May 25, 2008.
 "Aegean and Western Turkey sclerophyllous and mixed forests". Terrestrial Ecoregions. World Wildlife Fund. Retrieved May 25, 2008.
 "Southern Anatolian montane conifer and deciduous forests". Terrestrial Ecoregions. World Wildlife Fund. Retrieved May 25, 2008.
 "Eastern Mediterranean conifer-sclerophyllous-broadleaf forests". Terrestrial Ecoregions. World Wildlife Fund. Retrieved May 25, 2008.
 "A Kurdish Majority In Turkey Within One Generation?". May 6, 2012.
 Webb, L.S.; Roten, L.G. (2009). The Multicultural Cookbook for Students. EBL-Schweitzer. ABC-CLIO. pp. 286–287. ISBN 978-0-313-37559-0.
Bibliography
Steadman, Sharon R.; McMahon, Gregory (2011). McMahon, Gregory; Steadman, Sharon, eds. The Oxford Handbook of Ancient Anatolia:(10,000–323 BCE). Oxford University Press Inc. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195376142.001.0001. ISBN 9780195376142
Further reading
Akat, Uücel, Neşe Özgünel, and Aynur Durukan. 1991. Anatolia: A World Heritage. Ankara: Kültür Bakanliǧi.
Brewster, Harry. 1993. Classical Anatolia: The Glory of Hellenism. London: I.B. Tauris.
Donbaz, Veysel, and Şemsi Güner. 1995. The Royal Roads of Anatolia. Istanbul: Dünya.
Dusinberre, Elspeth R. M. 2013. Empire, Authority, and Autonomy In Achaemenid Anatolia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gates, Charles, Jacques Morin, and Thomas Zimmermann. 2009. Sacred Landscapes In Anatolia and Neighboring Regions. Oxford: Archaeopress.
Mikasa, Takahito, ed. 1999. Essays On Ancient Anatolia. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Takaoğlu, Turan. 2004. Ethnoarchaeological Investigations In Rural Anatolia. İstanbul: Ege Yayınları.
Taracha, Piotr. 2009. Religions of Second Millennium Anatolia. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Taymaz, Tuncay, Y. Yilmaz, and Yildirim Dilek. 2007. The Geodynamics of the Aegean and Anatolia. London: Geological Society.
External links
Library resources about 
Anatolia
Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
 Media related to Anatolia at Wikimedia Commons
Links to related articles
Categories: AnatoliaPeninsulas of AsiaGeography of Western AsiaNear EastGeography of ArmeniaGeography of TurkeyPeninsulas of TurkeyRegions of TurkeyRegions of AsiaAncient Near EastAncient Greek geographyPhysiographic provincesHistorical regions
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons

Languages
العربية
Беларуская
Español
हिन्दी
Polski
Türkçe
Українська
اردو
中文
82 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 8 March 2019, at 13:16 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Sea of Marmara
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
"Propontis" redirects here. For the Liberian cargo ship, see SS Propontis.
Sea of Marmara
Sea of Marmara map.png
Map of the Sea of Marmara
Location	Europe and Asia
Coordinates	40°41′12″N 28°19′7″ECoordinates: 40°41′12″N 28°19′7″E
Type	Inland Sea
Native name	Marmara Denizi
Primary inflows	Simav River, Biga Çayı, Nilüfer River
Primary outflows	Turkish Straits
Catchment area	11,500 km2 (4,400 sq mi)
Basin countries	Turkey
Surface area	11,350 km2 (4,380 sq mi)
Average depth	494 m (1,621 ft)
Max. depth	1,370 m (4,490 ft)
Water volume	3,378 km3 (810 cu mi)
Islands	Marmara Island, Avşa, İmralı, Prince Islands, Paşalimanı and Ekinlik Island
Settlements	Istanbul, Bursa, İzmit, Tekirdağ, Balıkesir, Çanakkale, and Yalova

Photograph of the Sea of Marmara from space (STS-40, 1991). The sea is the light-colored body of water.

This astronaut photograph highlights the metropolitan area of Izmit along the northern and eastern shores of the Sea of Marmara, at the end of the Gulf of Izmit.

Sea of Marmara – From the dining room of the Rákóczi exile
The Sea of Marmara (/ˈmɑːrmərə/; Turkish: Marmara Denizi), also known as the Sea of Marmora or the Marmara Sea, and in the context of classical antiquity as the Propontis is the inland sea, entirely within the borders of Turkey, that connects the Black Sea to the Aegean Sea, thus separating Turkey's Asian and European parts. The Bosphorus strait connects it to the Black Sea and the Dardanelles strait to the Aegean Sea. The former also separates Istanbul into its Asian and European sides. The Sea of Marmara is a small sea with an area of 11,350 km2 (4,380 sq mi), and dimensions 280 km × 80 km (174 mi × 50 mi).[1] Its greatest depth is 1,370 m (4,490 ft).


Contents
1	Name
2	Geography
2.1	Extent
3	Towns and cities
4	Image gallery
5	See also
6	References
7	External links
Name
The sea takes its name from Marmara Island, which is rich in sources of marble, from the Greek μάρμαρον (marmaron), "marble".[2]

The sea's ancient Greek name Propontis derives from pro- (before) and pontos (sea), deriving from the fact that the Greeks sailed through it to reach the Black Sea, Pontos. In Greek mythology, a storm on Propontis brought the Argonauts back to an island they had left, precipitating a battle where either Jason or Heracles killed King Cyzicus, who mistook them for his Pelasgian enemies.[3]

Geography
The surface salinity of the sea averages about 22 parts per thousand, which is slightly greater than that of the Black Sea, but only about two-thirds that of most oceans. The water is much more saline at the sea bottom, averaging salinities of around 38 parts per thousand, similar to that of the Mediterranean Sea. This high-density saline water, like that of the Black Sea, does not migrate to the surface. Water from the Susurluk, Biga (Granicus) and Gonen Rivers also reduces the salinity of the sea, though with less influence than on the Black Sea. With little land in Thrace draining southward, almost all of these rivers flow from Anatolia.

The sea contains the archipelago of the Prince Islands and Marmara Island, Avşa and Paşalimanı.

The south coast of the sea is heavily indented, and includes the Gulf of İzmit (Turkish: İzmit Körfezi), the Gulf of Gemlik (Turkish: Gemlik Körfezi), Gulf of Bandırma (Turkish: Bandırma Körfezi) and the Gulf of Erdek (Turkish: Erdek Körfezi). During a storm on December 29, 1999, the Russian oil tanker Volgoneft broke in two in the Sea of Marmara, and more than 1,500 tonnes of oil were spilled into the water.

The North Anatolian Fault, which has triggered many major earthquakes in recent years, such as the August and November 1999 earthquakes in Izmit and Düzce, respectively, runs under the sea.

Extent
The International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Sea of Marmara as follows:[4]

On the West. The Dardanelles limit of the Aegean Sea [A line joining Kum Kale (26°11'E) and Cape Helles].
On the Northeast. A line joining Cape Rumili with Cape Anatoli (41°13'N).
Towns and cities
Towns and cities on the Marmara Sea coast include:

Istanbul Province
Istanbul
Adalar
Bakırköy
Bostancı
Kadıköy
Kartal
Kumkapı
Pendik
Üsküdar
Yeşilköy
Zeytinburnu
Büyükçekmece
Kumburgaz
Silivri
Tuzla
Balıkesir Province
Bandırma
Erdek
Gönen
Marmara
Bursa Province

Gemlik
Karacabey
Mudanya
Çanakkale Province

Biga
Gelibolu
Lapseki
Kocaeli Province
Derince
Eskihisar
Gebze
Gölcük
Hereke
İzmit (Pr. Cap)
Karamürsel
Körfez
Tekirdağ Province

Marmara Ereğli
Şarköy
Tekirdağ (Pr. Cap)
Yalova Province
Altınova
Armutlu
Çiftlikköy
Çınarcık
Termal
Yalova (Pr. Cap)
Image gallery

Aerial view of the Bosphorus, southern end and Istanbul in the background

 

View of Marmara Sea from Istanbul (Kumkapı)

 

Sea of Marmara approaching Yassıada

 

View of the Marmara Sea from Yeşilköy

 
View of the Marmara Sea from Kadıköy

See also
1509 Constantinople earthquake
1999 İzmit earthquake
Black Sea deluge hypothesis
Kanal İstanbul
Montreux Convention Regarding the Regime of the Straits
Turkish Straits
References
 "Marmara, Sea of - Dictionary definition of Marmara, Sea of - Encyclopedia.com: FREE online dictionary". www.encyclopedia.com. Retrieved 3 January 2018.
 Liddell, Henry George; Scott, Robert. "A Greek-English Lexicon". Henry Stuart Jones and Roderick McKenzie. Perseus. Retrieved January 12, 2009.
 Parada, Carlos. "Greek Mythology Link". Archived from the original on February 13, 2002. Retrieved April 30, 2001.
 "Limits of Oceans and Seas" (PDF) (3rd ed.). International Hydrographic Organization. 1953. Retrieved February 7, 2010.
External links
 Media related to Sea of Marmara at Wikimedia Commons
Encyclopædia Britannica
SCIENCE FOCUS – SeaWiFS, Sea of Marmara: Where Ancient Myth and Modern Science Mix
vte
Earth's oceans and seas
Authority control Edit this at Wikidata	
GND: 4135005-4 VIAF: 248583530 WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 248583530
Categories: Sea of MarmaraAncient Greek geographySeas of the Mediterranean SeaSeas of TurkeyMarmara RegionLandforms of Istanbul ProvinceLandforms of Balıkesir ProvinceLandforms of Bursa ProvinceLandforms of Çanakkale ProvinceLandforms of Kocaeli ProvinceLandforms of Tekirdağ ProvinceLandforms of Yalova Province
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons

Languages
Беларуская
Deutsch
हिन्दी
Lietuvių
Polski
Русский
Türkçe
Українська
中文
96 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 11 March 2019, at 18:59 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki

Dardanelles
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
For the Australian band, see Dardanelles (band).
"Hellespont" redirects here. For the ancient town, see Hellespontine Phrygia. For the Roman province, see Hellespontus.
Dardanelles
Dardanelles map2.png
Close-up topographic map of the Dardanelles
Dardanelles is located in TurkeyDardanellesDardanelles
Show map of Turkey
Show map of Europe
Show all
Coordinates	40.2°N 26.4°ECoordinates: 40.2°N 26.4°E
Type	strait
Basin countries	 Turkey
Max. length	61 km (38 mi)
Min. width	1.2 km (0.75 mi)
Dardanelles is located in EuropeDardanelles
A map depicting the locations of the Turkish Straits, with the Dardanelles in red. The sovereign national territory of Turkey is highlighted in green.

Map showing the location of the Dardanelles (yellow), relative to the Bosporus (red), the Sea of Marmara, the Aegean Sea, and the Black Sea.

Satellite image of the Dardanelles, taken from the Landsat 7 in September 2006. The body of water on the left is the Aegean Sea, while the one on the upper right is the Sea of Marmara. The Dardanelles is the tapered waterway running diagonally between the two seas, from the northeast to the southwest. The long, narrow upper peninsula on the northern shores of the strait is Gallipoli (Turkish: Gelibolu), and constitutes the banks of the continent of Europe, while the lower peninsula is Troad (Turkish: Biga) and constitutes the banks of the continent of Asia. The city of Çanakkale is visible along the shores of the lower peninsula, centered at the only point where a sharp outcropping juts into the otherwise-linear Dardanelles.
The Dardanelles (/dɑːrdəˈnɛlz/; Turkish: Çanakkale Boğazı, Greek: Δαρδανέλλια, translit. Dardanellia), also known from Classical Antiquity as the Hellespont (/ˈhɛlɪspɒnt/; Greek: Ἑλλήσποντος, Hellespontos, literally "Sea of Helle"), is a narrow, natural strait and internationally significant waterway in northwestern Turkey that forms part of the continental boundary between Europe and Asia, and separates Asian Turkey from European Turkey. One of the world's narrowest straits used for international navigation, the Dardanelles connects the Sea of Marmara with the Aegean and Mediterranean Seas, while also allowing passage to the Black Sea by extension via the Bosphorus. The Dardanelles is 61 kilometres (38 mi) long, and 1.2 to 6 kilometres (0.75 to 3.73 mi) wide, averaging 55 metres (180 ft) deep with a maximum depth of 103 metres (338 ft) at its narrowest point abreast the city of Çanakkale.

Most of the northern shores of the strait along the Gallipoli Peninsula (Turkish: Gelibolu) are sparsely settled, while the southern shores along the Troad Peninsula (Turkish: Biga) are inhabited by the city of Çanakkale's urban population of 110,000.

Together with the Bosphorus, the Dardanelles forms the Turkish Straits.


Contents
1	Name
2	Geography
2.1	Present morphology
3	History
3.1	Ancient Greek, Persian, Roman, and Byzantine eras (pre-1454)
3.1.1	Greek and Persian history
3.1.2	Byzantine history
3.2	Ottoman era (1354–1922)
3.2.1	Nineteenth century
3.2.2	World War I
3.3	Turkish republican and modern eras (1923–present)
4	Crossings
4.1	Maritime
4.2	Land
4.3	Subsea
5	In popular culture
6	Image gallery
7	See also
8	References
9	External links
Name
The contemporary Turkish name Çanakkale Boğazı, meaning "Çanakkale Strait", is derived from the eponymous midsize city that adjoins the strait, itself meaning "Pottery Fort"—from Çanak (pottery) + Kale (Fortress)—in reference to the area's famous pottery and ceramic wares, and the landmark Ottoman fortress of Sultaniye.

The English name Dardanelles is an abbreviation of Strait of the Dardanelles. During Ottoman times there was a castle on each side of the strait. These castles together were called the Dardanelles,[1][2] probably named after Dardanus, an ancient city on the Asian shore of the strait which in turn was said to take its name from Dardanus, the mythical son of Zeus and Electra.

The ancient Greek name Ἑλλήσποντος (Hellespontos) means "Sea of Helle", and was the ancient name of the narrow strait. It was variously named in classical literature Hellespontium Pelagus, Rectum Hellesponticum, and Fretum Hellesponticum. It was so called from Helle, the daughter of Athamas, who was drowned here in the mythology of the Golden Fleece.

Geography
As a maritime waterway, the Dardanelles connects various seas along the Eastern Mediterranean, the Balkans, the Near East, and Western Eurasia, and specifically connects the Aegean Sea to the Sea of Marmara. The Marmara further connects to the Black Sea via the Bosphorus, while the Aegean further links to the Mediterranean. Thus, the Dardanelles allows maritime connections from the Black Sea all the way to the Mediterranean Sea and the Atlantic Ocean via Gibraltar, and the Indian Ocean through the Suez Canal, making it a crucial international waterway, in particular for the passage of goods coming in from Russia.

The strait is located at approximately 40°13′N 26°26′E.

Present morphology
The strait is 61 kilometres (38 mi) long, and 1.2 to 6 kilometres (0.75 to 3.73 mi) wide, averaging 55 metres (180 ft) deep with a maximum depth of 103 metres (338 ft) at its narrowest point at Nara Burnu, abreast Çanakkale.[3] There are two major currents through the strait: a surface current flows from the Black Sea towards the Aegean Sea, and a more saline undercurrent flows in the opposite direction.[4]

The Dardanelles is unique in many respects. The very narrow and winding shape of the strait is more akin to that of a river. It is considered one of the most hazardous, crowded, difficult and potentially dangerous waterways in the world. The currents produced by the tidal action in the Black Sea and the Sea of Marmara are such that ships under sail must await at anchorage for the right conditions before entering the Dardanelles.

History
As part of the only passage between the Black Sea and the Mediterranean, the Dardanelles has always been of great importance from a commercial and military point of view, and remains strategically important today. It is a major sea access route for numerous countries, including Russia and Ukraine. Control over it has been an objective of a number of hostilities in modern history, notably the attack of the Allied Powers on the Dardanelles during the 1915 Battle of Gallipoli in the course of World War I.

Ancient Greek, Persian, Roman, and Byzantine eras (pre-1454)
Greek and Persian history
The ancient city of Troy was located near the western entrance of the strait, and the strait's Asiatic shore was the focus of the Trojan War. Troy was able to control the marine traffic entering this vital waterway. The Persian army of Xerxes I of Persia and later the Macedonian army of Alexander the Great crossed the Dardanelles in opposite directions to invade each other's lands, in 480 BC and 334 BC respectively.

Herodotus says that, circa 482 BC, Xerxes I (the son of Darius) had two pontoon bridges built across the width of the Hellespont at Abydos, in order that his huge army could cross from Persia into Greece. This crossing was named by Aeschylus in his tragedy The Persians as the cause of divine intervention against Xerxes.[5]

According to Herodotus (vv.34), both bridges were destroyed by a storm and Xerxes had those responsible for building the bridges beheaded and the strait itself whipped. The Histories of Herodotus vii.33–37 and vii.54–58 give details of building and crossing of Xerxes' Pontoon Bridges. Xerxes is then said to have thrown fetters into the strait, given it three hundred lashes and branded it with red-hot irons as the soldiers shouted at the water.[6]

Herodotus commented that this was a "highly presumptuous way to address the Hellespont" but in no way atypical of Xerxes. (vii.35)

Harpalus the engineer eventually helped the invading armies to cross by lashing the ships together with their bows facing the current and, so it is said, two additional anchors.

From the perspective of ancient Greek mythology, it was said that Helle, the daughter of Athamas, was drowned at the Dardanelles in the legend of the Golden Fleece. Likewise, the strait was the scene of the legend of Hero and Leander, wherein the lovesick Leander swam the strait nightly in order to tryst with his beloved, the priestess Hero, and was drowned in a storm.

Byzantine history
The Dardanelles were vital to the defence of Constantinople during the Byzantine period.

Also, the Dardanelles was an important source of income for the ruler of the region. At the Istanbul Archaeological Museum a marble plate contains a law by the Byzantine Emperor Anastasius I (491–518 AD), that regulated fees for passage through the customs office of the Dardanelles. Translation:

... Whoever dares to violate these regulations shall no longer be regarded as a friend, and he shall be punished. Besides, the administrator of the Dardanelles must have the right to receive 50 golden Litrons, so that these rules, which we make out of piety, shall never ever be violated... ... The distinguished governor and major of the capital, who already has both hands full of things to do, has turned to our lofty piety in order to reorganize the entry and exit of all ships through the Dardanelles... ... Starting from our day and also in the future, anybody who wants to pass through the Dardanelles must pay the following: 
– All wine merchants who bring wine to the capital (Constantinopolis), except Cilicians, have to pay the Dardanelles officials 6 follis and 2 sextarius of wine. 
– In the same manner, all merchants of olive-oil, vegetables and lard must pay the Dardanelles officials 6 follis. Cilician sea-merchants have to pay 3 follis and in addition to that, 1 keration (12 follis) to enter, and 2 keration to exit.
– All wheat merchants have to pay the officials 3 follis per modius, and a further sum of 3 follis when leaving.

Since the 14th century the Dardanelles have almost continuously been controlled by the Turks.

Ottoman era (1354–1922)
The Dardanelles continued to constitute an important waterway under the reign of the Ottoman Empire, starting with the conquest of Gallipoli in 1354.

Ottoman control of the strait continued largely without interruption or challenges until the 19th century, when the Empire started its decline.

Nineteenth century
Gaining control or special access to the strait became a key foreign policy goal of the Russian Empire during the 19th century. During the Napoleonic Wars, Russia—supported by Great Britain in the Dardanelles Operation—blockaded the straits in 1807. Following the Ottoman Empire's defeat in the Russo-Turkish War of 1828–29, in 1833 Russia pressured the Ottomans to sign the Treaty of Hunkiar Iskelesi—which required the straits to be closed to warships of non-Black Sea powers at Russia's request. That would have effectively given Russia a free hand in the Black Sea.

That treaty alarmed the losers,[clarification needed] who were concerned that the consequences of potential Russian expansionism in the Black Sea and Mediterranean regions could conflict with their own possessions and economic interest in the regions. At the London Straits Convention in July 1841, the United Kingdom, France, Austria, and Prussia pressured Russia to agree that only Turkish warships could traverse the Dardanelles in peacetime. The United Kingdom and France subsequently sent their fleets through the straits to attack the Crimean Peninsula during the Crimean War (1853-1856) —but this was done as allies of the Ottoman Empire. That convention was formally reaffirmed by the Congress of Paris in 1856, following the Russian defeat in the Crimean War. It remained technically in force into the 20th and 21st centuries.

World War I
Main articles: Occupation of Constantinople and Chanak Crisis
Main article: Gallipoli Campaign
In 1915 the Allies sent a massive invasion force of British, Indian, Australian, New Zealand, French and Newfoundland troops to attempt to open up the straits. In the Gallipoli campaign, Turkish troops trapped the Allies on the beaches of the Gallipoli peninsula. The campaign did damage to the career of Winston Churchill, then the First Lord of the Admiralty, who had eagerly promoted the unsuccessful use of Royal Navy sea power to force open the straits. Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, later founder of the Republic of Turkey, served as a commander for the Ottomans during the land campaign.

The Turks mined the straits to prevent Allied ships from penetrating them, but in minor actions, two submarines, one British and one Australian, did succeed in penetrating the minefields. The British one sank an obsolete Turkish pre-dreadnought battleship off the Golden Horn of Istanbul. Sir Ian Hamilton's Mediterranean Expeditionary Force failed in its attempt to capture the Gallipoli peninsula, and its withdrawal was ordered in December 1915, after eight months' fighting. Total Allied deaths included 43,000 British and Irish, 15,000 French, 8,700 Australians, 2,700 New Zealanders, 1,370 Indians and 49 Newfoundlanders. Total Turkish deaths were around 60,000.

Following the war, the 1920 Treaty of Sèvres demilitarized the strait and made it an international territory under the control of the League of Nations. The Ottoman Empire's non-ethnically Turkish territories were broken up and partitioned among the Allied Powers, and Turkish jurisdiction over the straits curbed.

Turkish republican and modern eras (1923–present)
After the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire following a lengthy campaign by Turks as part of the Turkish War of Independence against both the Allied Powers and the Ottoman court, the Republic of Turkey was created in 1923 by the Treaty of Lausanne, which established most of the modern sovereign territory of Turkey and restored the straits to Turkish territory, with the condition that Turkey keep them demilitarized and allow all foreign warships and commercial shipping to traverse the straits freely.

As part of its national security strategy, Turkey eventually rejected the terms of the treaty, and subsequently remilitarized the straits area over the following decade. Following extensive diplomatic negotiations, the reversion was formalized under the Montreux Convention Regarding the Regime of the Turkish Straits in July 20, 1936. That convention, which is still in force today, treats the straits as an international shipping lane while allowing Turkey to retain the right to restrict the naval traffic of non-Black Sea states.

During World War II, through February 1945, when Turkey was neutral for most of the length of the conflict, the Dardanelles were closed to the ships of the belligerent nations. Turkey declared war on Germany in February 1945, but it did not employ any offensive forces during the war.

In July 1946, the Soviet Union sent a note to Turkey proposing a new régime for the Dardanelles that would have excluded all nations except the Black Sea powers. The second proposal was that the straits should be put under joint Turkish-Soviet defence. This meant that Turkey, the Soviet Union, Bulgaria and Romania would be the only states having access to the Black Sea through the Dardanelles. The Turkish government however, under pressure from the United States, rejected these proposals.[7]

Turkey joined NATO in 1952, thus affording its straits even more strategic importance as a commercial and military waterway.

In more recent years,[when?] the Turkish Straits have become particularly important for the oil industry. Russian oil, from ports such as Novorossyisk, is exported by tankers primarily to western Europe and the U.S. via the Bosphorus and the Dardanelles straits.

Crossings
Maritime
The waters of the Dardanelles are traversed by numerous passenger and vehicular ferries daily, as well as recreational and fishing boats ranging from dinghies to yachts owned by both public and private entities.

The strait also experiences significant amounts of international commercial shipping traffic by freighters and tankers.

Land
At present, there are no vehicular crossings across the strait. However, as part of planned expansions to the Turkish National Highway Network, the Turkish Government is considering the construction of a suspension bridge between Sarıçay (a district of Çanakkale Province) on the Asian side, to Kilitbahir on the European side, at the narrowest part of the strait.[8] In March 2017, construction of the Çanakkale 1915 Bridge between the cities of Gelibolu and Lapseki started.

Subsea
2 submarine cable systems transmitting electric power at 400 kV voltage bridge the Dardanelles to feed west and east of Istanbul. They have their own landing stations in Lapseki and Sütlüce. The first, situated in the northeast quarter portion of the strait, has been energised in April 2015 and leads 2 GW via 6 phases 400 kV AC 3.9 km far thru the sea. The second, somewhat in the middle of the strait, has been still under construction in June 2016 and has quite similar data.

Both subsea power lines cross 4 optical fibre data lines laid earlier along the strait.[9] A published map shows communication lines leading from Istanbul into the Mediterranean, named MedNautilus and landing at Athens, Sicily and elsewhere.[10]

In popular culture
English Romantic poet Lord Byron (1788–1824) swam across the Dardanelles on 3 May 1810, and recorded it in his poem Don Juan (1821).[11][12]

Çanakkale, located along the southern shores of the strait, is the finishing point every year for an organised swim across the Dardanelles, which kicks off from Eceabat. This event emulates the swim in 1810 by Lord Byron, who was himself emulating the legendary swim by Leander in the story of Hero and Leander.

The shores of the strait are also the site of ancient Troy. The "wooden horse" from the 2004 movie Troy is exhibited on the seafront.

The Dardanelles is also the site of two notable maritime accidents in Turkish naval history, when two generations of the submarine TCG Dumlupinar were struck by tankers on their way back from naval missions. The first incident resulted in the deaths of 96 sailors, while the second incident had no fatalities.

Due to the importance of the Gallipoli Campaign in many countries' histories, the Dardanelles also features prominently in many documentaries and films about World War I.

The Dardanelles is mentioned in the song No place like London from the movie Sweeney Todd. The song is written and composed by Stephen Sondheim and sung by Johnny Depp and Jamie Campbell Bower. Jamie's character Anthony sings, "I have sailed the world, beheld its wonders, from the Dardanelles to the mountains of Peru...[13]"

"Bow Down to Washington", the fight song of the University of Washington, references the Dardanelles in the lyrics: "Our boys are there with bells, their fighting blood excels, it's harder to push them over the line than pass the Dardanelles."[14]

Image gallery

An artist's illustration depicting Xerxes' alleged "punishment" of the Hellespont.

 

Marble plate with 6th century AD Byzantine law regulating payment of customs in the Dardanelles.

 

Historic map of the Dardanelles by Piri Reis.

 

The ANZACs at Gallipoli in 1915.

 
Map of the Dardanelles drawn by G.F. Morrell, 1915, showing the Gallipoli peninsula and the west coast of Turkey, as well as the location of front line troops and landings during the Gallipoli Campaign.

 

1915 Landing of French troops in Moudros (Lemnos island) during the Gallipoli Campaign

 

A view of the Dardanelles from Gallipoli peninsula.

 

A view of Çanakkale from the Dardanelles.

 
Ferry line across the Dardanelles in Çanakkale.

 

Aerial view of the city of Çanakkale.

See also
Action of 26 June 1656
Battle of the Dardanelles (disambiguation)
Dardanelles Commission
List of maritime incidents in the Turkish Straits
References
 David van Hoogstraten and Matthaeus Brouërius van Nidek, Groot algemeen historisch, geografisch, genealogisch, en oordeelkundig woordenboek, Volume 5, Amsterdam/Utrecht/The Hague 1729, p. 25, s.v. 'Dardanellen Archived 24 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine'
 George Crabb, Universal Historical Dictionary, Volume 1, London 1825, s.v. 'Dardanelles Archived 28 April 2018 at the Wayback Machine'
 Nautical Chart at GeoHack-Dardanelles, Map Tech
 Rozakēs, Chrēstos L. (1987). The Turkish Straits. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. p. 1. ISBN 9024734649. Retrieved 1 August 2017.
 "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 19 November 2003. Retrieved 26 September 2003.; the play.
 Green, Peter The Greco-Persian Wars (London 1996) 75.
 Cabell, Phillips, The Truman presidency : the history of a triumphant succession (New York 1966), 102 - 103.
 "Bosphorus Technical Consulting Corporation". www.botek.info. Archived from the original on 2013-11-06.
 Gülnazi Yüce: Submarine Cable Projects (2-03) Archived 9 April 2018 at the Wayback Machine presented at First South East European Regional CIGRÉ Conference (SEERC), Portoroz, Slovenis, 7–8 June 2016, retrieved 8 April 2018. – PDF
 Submarine Cable Map 2017 Archived 28 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine telegeography.com, retrieved 9 April 2018.
 "Lord Byron swims the Hellespont - May 03, 1810 - HISTORY.com". www.history.com. THIS DAY IN HISTORY. Archived from the original on 7 March 2010.
 Barr, Matt (29 September 2007). "The day I swam all the way to Asia". the Guardian. Archived from the original on 30 December 2017. Retrieved 28 April 2018.
 "Sweeney Todd feat. ... - No Place Like London Lyrics". LetsSingIt. Archived from the original on 5 August 2016. Retrieved 20 June 2016.
 "Bow Down to Washington — UW Libraries". www.lib.washington.edu. Archived from the original on 30 November 2016.
External links
	Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dardanelles.
Pictures of the city of Çanakkale
Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University
Map of Hellespont
Livius.org: Hellespont
Monuments and memorials of the Gallipoli campaign along the Dardanelles
Canakkale Bogazi
Authority control Edit this at Wikidata	
GND: 4011051-5 NARA: 10044370 VIAF: 243410280 WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 243410280
vte
Ancient Greece
vte
UNESCO Tentative list of World Heritage sites in Turkey
Categories: DardanellesLandforms of Çanakkale ProvinceStraits of the Mediterranean SeaTrojansWorld Heritage Site Tentative listStraits of TurkeyTurkish Straits
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons

Languages
Беларуская
Deutsch
Ελληνικά
Lietuvių
Polski
Русский
Türkçe
Українська
中文
81 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 11 March 2019, at 04:28 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia Foundation Powered by MediaWiki
